TITLE:
      Sleep and Immunity in Rheumatoid Arthritis : Remicade Substudy
SUMMARY:
      More than half of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients complain of sleep disturbance and this
      cardinal complaint is associated with fatigue, pain, and depressed mood in patient with
      chronic inflammatory disorder. Despite the frequency of this complain, there is limited
      efforts to evaluate sleep or the abnormal increases in the expression of proinflamatory
      cytokines play a key role in the progression of RA, we hypothesize that the cytokine network
      is one physiological system that is associated with sleep disturbances in RA patients.
      Proinflamatory cytokines signal the central nervous system and are associated with increased
      symptoms of pain, fatigue, and depressed mood in rheumatic patients. Moreover, sleep loss is
      coincident with alterations in sympathetic tone, which is thought to contribute to increases
      of proinflammatory cytokine activity. The specific aims of the study are to examine the
      contribution of cytokines on sleep by administering a TNF antagonist vs. placebo to probe
      the action of proinflammatory cytokines on sleep in RA Patients. Examination of sleep and
      its consequences for autonomic functioning and proinflamatory cytokine activity within the
      framework of an observational and experimental research design will have implications for
      understanding the psycho-biological mechanisms that link sleep and the clinical
      manifestations of RA. Results from this study will guide the developments of interventions
      that target disordered sleep with potential effects on disability in RA.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Abnormal sleep is reported by more than half of rheumatoid arthritis patients, in addition
      to the traditional symptoms associated with the disease, such as morning stiffness, pain,
      and functional debility. When recording brain activity during sleep using
      electroencephalography or EEG. Sleep abnormalities have been found independent of pain and
      thus the mechanisms to account for disordered sleep in this population are unknown. The
      immune system, via pro-inflammatory cytokines, plays a major role in the development of
      rheumatoid arthritis. Pro-inflammatory cytokines are molecules that act as signals to
      stimulate activity of different arms of the immune system. New medications such as remicade
      (infliximab) have been developed which slow disease activity by blocking the activity of
      these pro-inflammatory cytokines. This is done by binding to the cytokine TNF and rendering
      it biologically inactive. Proinflammatory cytokines also appear to play a role in sleep. A
      number of basic and human studies have found that cytokines and sleep exhibit a
      bi-directional relationship. However, no study to date has explored this relationship in a
      rheumatoid arthritis population. Thus, this research study has the potential to test whether
      cytokines influence sleep in rheumatoid arthritis. We will determine if a single dose of a
      pro-inflammatory cytokine blocking medication (remicade) affects sleep in rheumatoid
      arthritis patients. Interested participants will undergo an eligibility interview to review
      in-depth subject participation, RA diagnosis, written Consent. Following eligibility,
      patients will undergo a single overnight sleep assessment lasting four nights at the General
      Clinical Research Center. After the adaption and baseline nights, on day 3, patients will be
      randomized to receive either 10 mg/kg of remicade or placebo and their sleep will be
      subsequently monitored for two additional nights ( post-infusion 1 and post-infusion 2).
      Participants will then be follow-up for three months after either remicade or placebo
      infusions. In this way, the effects of blocking pro-inflammatory cytokines can be examined
      for sleep, morning stiffness, pain and fatigue.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Rheumatoid arthritis patients will meet American College of Rheumatology revised
             criteria (Arnett, Edworthy et al. 1988). This requires at least four of the following
             seven criteria: 1) morning joint stiffness; 2) arthritis in 3 or more joint areas; 3)
             arthritis of hand joints; 4) symmetric arthritis; 5) rheumatoid nodules; 6) presence
             of serum rheumatoid factor and 7) changes on posteroanterior hand and wrist
             radiographs. In addition, criteria 1-4 must be present for at least four weeks.
             Subjects must be between 18 and 85 years of age.

          2. If rheumatoid arthritis patients are receiving treatment with traditional disease
             modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD), such as methotrexate, sulfasalazine or
             hydroxychloroquine, they must be on a stable regime for one month before study and
             stable throughout study.

          3. If rheumatoid arthritis patients have received treatment with a TNF antagonist or
             other biologic medication, they must be drug free for greater than 3 months.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Steroids - Individuals currently taking greater than an equivalent of 10 mg of
             prednisone will be excluded given the potent anti-inflammatory effects of such
             medications.

          2. Opioids - Individuals using multiple daily dosage schedule of opioid agents such as
             oxycodone (Percocet), hydrocodone (Vicodin), morphine, Dilaudid will be excluded.

          3. Co-morbid medical disorders - the presence of active unstable and uncontrolled
             co-morbid medical conditions such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer
             will be exclusionary criteria. In particular, individuals with co-morbid inflammatory
             disorders such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis and other autoimmune
             disorders will be excluded. Any uncontrolled medical condition that is deemed by the
             investigators to interfere with the proposed study procedures, or put the study
             participant at undue risk will also be considered exclusionary criteria.

          4. Chronic infections - individuals with chronic infections will also be excluded
             because of effects on immune markers measured in study.

          5. Co-morbid pain disorders - individuals with co-morbid pain disorders such as
             fibromyalgia will also be excluded. Individuals with fibromyalgia have been found to
             have sleep abnormalities as well as daytime fatigue and pain (Drewes 1999) and thus
             could confound findings.

          6. Psychiatric disorders - current conditions such as major depressive disorder, bipolar
             disorder and risk for suicide will also be considered exclusionary criteria.

          7. Gender-based criteria - pregnant or breast-feeding women will also be excluded
             because of their effects on neuroendocrine systems and sleep
