TITLE:
      Human Movement Database
SUMMARY:
      This study will collect information on the different ways people control limb and body
      movements. This information will be used to develop a database on normal movements and
      adaptive movements of people who have diseases that affect the way they move. The database
      will serve as a tool to improve diagnosis and treatment of patients with movement-related
      problems.

      Volunteers over the age of 4 who have normal movement patterns or who have developed
      different ways to perform movement tasks may be eligible for this study. A physical
      therapist will screen candidates to determine their strength, flexibility and range of
      motion of joints.

      Participants will be asked to perform movements such as walking, walking up or down stairs,
      standing quietly or reaching for an object. For the test, the arms and legs are wrapped with
      a soft, rubber-like material to which small plastic reflective balls are attached. A piece
      of firm material called a shell may be attached to the rubber sleeves or other areas of the
      body. Then the volunteer performs the specified task several times while special cameras
      record the movement. The cameras only record the positions of the reflective balls during
      movement, not the person s face or body. Electrical activity in the muscles also may be
      measured, using small metal electrodes attached to the surface of the skin with an adhesive
      bandage.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The purpose of this study is to develop a database of normative and adaptive control
      strategies for human motion. Up to 900 volunteers will serve as subjects after they complete
      a neuromusculoskeletal screening exam. Subjects will be asked to perform one or more tasks
      related to the execution of activities of daily living such as: walking on the ground,
      walking on a treadmill, quiet and perturbed standing, stair ascent and descent, turning and
      jumping, cycling, elliptical training, and isolated upper and lower extremity limb movements
      or trunk movements. The subjects movement patterns will be recorded using a
      three-dimensional motion tracking system. Motion data will be analyzed using a rigid body
      six degree-of-freedom approach when applicable. Temporal/spatial, kinematic, kinetic, and
      surface electromyographic variables will be collected and calculated.

      Many factors affect the ability to move. The ones we are mainly interested in investigating
      include muscle weakness, spasticity, and dynamic balance. To quantify strength or
      spasticity, a force transducer is needed such as a Biodex isokinetic dynamometer which is a
      standard rehabilitation assessment and training device, or a more simple handheld
      dynamometer can be used that the person presses against as force is recorded. For the
      spasticity tests, a person or a machine such as the Biodex moves a joint through an arc of
      motion (e.g. elbow, knee, or ankle) at a range of speeds from 5-240 degrees per second while
      resistance to motion is being recorded or graded subjectively. EMG and joint position may be
      collected simultaneously during the passive movements. The dynamic balance tests will be
      performed on a force plate or using a clinical balance testing device, the Equitest, by
      Neurcom. To determine if electrical stimulation (ES) improves limb movement, walking, and
      balance, a device such as the WalkAide may be used in patients who have some dysfunction in
      their lower extremities. Only persons with central nervous system injuries who have a foot
      drop gait pattern will be given the opportunity to use this device for 3-6 months. The
      WalkAide is worn below the knee and delivers individually programmed ES to aid in muscle
      function of the ankle.

      Patient groups will be identified clinically or statistically. Group means and standard
      deviations will then be computed. It is hoped the database developed may serve as a tool by
      which individual patient data may be compared in order to facilitate the diagnosis and
      optimize the treatment and clinical outcome of patients with movement related problems.

      An over ground harness system may be used for some of the over ground or instrumented gait
      and balance assessments if there is concern that the patient is too weak or unbalanced and
      therefore may trip or fall during the activity, or to help facilitate more normal patterns
      by decreasing the load borne by the trunk and/or legs.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      -  Any volunteer of any age from birth to old age who is deemed medically fit to
             participate and is willing to provide their informed consent will be included in the
             study.
