TITLE:
      Randomized Trial of Amoxicillin Versus Placebo for (Fast Breathing) Pneumonia
SUMMARY:
      The relative benefits and risks of antibiotic therapy in WHO defined fast breathing
      pneumonia in pre-school children in resource limited settings are controversial both at an
      individual and public health level. Most infections are viral or self-limiting and
      non-selective drug treatment has contributed to the global epidemic of antibiotic
      resistance. There is no high quality trial evidence in managing children with fast breathing
      in community settings and the WHO itself has called for evidence on which to update
      guidance. The investigators proposed non inferiority trial comparing standard antibiotic
      treatment with placebo in poor urban slum settings in South Asia to address this deficit.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Pneumonia is a major cause of illness and death in children in low-income countries. With a
      view to decreasing death from pneumonia, the World Health Organization and UNICEF developed
      the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) algorithm which simplifies management
      of common childhood illnesses such as pneumonia and diarrhea into different levels of
      severity for determining the most appropriate case management by primary healthcare
      providers. Many pneumonia cases are categorized as non-severe pneumonia (defined as fast
      breathing above the specified age cut-off for respiratory rates). As there is incomplete
      information regarding the cause of this type of "pneumonia" from primary care settings,
      treatment guidelines by WHO are dictated by culture information from hospital pneumonia
      cases which are different in severity and cause. Current WHO guidelines advocate the use of
      oral antibiotics for fast breathing pneumonia. However, it is postulated that most fast
      breathing pneumonia not requiring hospitalization is of viral etiology, thus does not
      require antibiotic treatment. The cost of antibiotic treatment for all children with
      pneumonia is high; an estimated US$ 200 million in South Asia & sub Saharan Africa alone.
      Since more than 60% of pneumonia is classified as non-severe (fast breathing), this puts a
      strain on already under-sourced programmes in low-income countries. Giving antibiotics where
      they confer no benefit also puts the child at risk of side effects and increases the risk of
      antimicrobial resistance in the community. This uncertainty forms the basis of the proposed
      study. Investigators propose to show in a clinical trial that the outcome of children
      diagnosed with WHO defined fast breathing pneumonia is similar regardless of whether they
      receive antibiotics or not. This study will be conducted in five primary health care centers
      located in low income communities of Karachi, Pakistan, with extensive trial experience.
      Children identified to have fast breathing without any danger signs will be randomized to
      receive either three days of the WHO recommended oral antibiotic (amoxicillin 250mg/5ml
      using WHO weight bands) or matching placebo (a drug that will taste and look like the
      amoxicillin but will not have an active ingredient) by a study physician working at the
      primary health center. The assignment of the antibiotic amoxicillin or placebo to a child
      will be done using a computer generated randomization list in a manner that at the end of
      the trial, there are equal numbers of children in both arms of the trial. Based on the
      statistical calculations for sample size, investigators need to assign 1214 children to
      receive amoxicillin and the same number of children to receive placebo. All children will
      receive the antibiotic or placebo under supervision of the primary health care physician in
      the morning. Evening doses will be delivered by locally hired Community Health Workers
      (CHWs) visiting the children at their home. All children will be assessed again on day 3 by
      a study physician to see if the child's presenting sign of high respiratory rate has
      resolved or not. All children with persistently high respiratory rate and/or development of
      a new clinical sign indicating illness progression will be labeled a treatment failure.
      There will invariably be some children with treatment failure in both the treatment arms;
      investigators hypothesize that there will be equal number of treatment failures in both the
      groups i.e. around 5%.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  History of cough or difficult breathing < 14 days (observed or reported) AND

          -  Respiratory rate ≥ 50 breaths per minute in children 2 to <12 months (on two
             consecutive readings by independent physicians) OR respiratory rate ≥ 40 breaths per
             minute in children12- 59 months (on two consecutive readings by independent
             physicians) AND

          -  Written informed consent by a legal guardian

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Previously enrolled in study

          -  Pedal edema

          -  History of hospitalization in last two weeks

          -  With severe lower chest wall in-drawing

          -  Known asthmatics,TB or other severe illness

          -  Antibiotics taken in last 48 hours

          -  Bulging fontanel

          -  Congenital heart disease

          -  Any surgical condition requiring hospitalization

          -  Out of catchment area

          -  Any general danger sign as defined by WHO: Stridor when calm; hypoxia (SaO2 < 90% in
             air) ; inability to feed; persistent vomiting (after three attempts to feed the baby
             within ½ hour); convulsions; reduced conscious level
