TITLE:
      Search a Correlation Between Lp(a) Rate and TFPI Activity in Obese Patients With Chest Pain Like Angina
SUMMARY:
      Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of mortality in our countries.
      Clinically, symptoms could be chest pain suggesting stable angina. Atherosclerosis is
      influenced by cardiovascular risk factors which obesity (Body Mass Index>30). Obesity is
      associated with an increase risk of cardiovascular complications.

      Lipoprotein(a) is regarded as an independent risk factor for premature cardiovascular
      disease. Lp(a) is composed of low-density lipoprotein - like particle bound to glycoprotein
      molecule: apolipoprotein(a). Plasma levels are determinated to more than 90% by genetic
      factors (no significant influence of statin, weight, lifestyle factor: diet, exercise). Two
      study with few patients have found that aspirin lowers serum Lp(a) levels. Elevated Lp(a) is
      a risk factor for recurrent coronary events in obese patient.

      Atherosclerosis is associated with imbalance of coagulation. TFPI (tissue factor pathway
      inhibitor) is the earliest inhibitor of the blood coagulation process, natural direct
      inhibitor of tissue factor. In-vitro, TFPI activity is inhibited by high Lp(a) .

      The aim of this study is to research reverse association between Lp(a) and TFPI activity in
      obese patient with chest pain like stable angina suggesting atherosclerotic heart disease
      and effect of aspirin.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Major

          -  Men

          -  Obese BMI>30

          -  No aspirin treatment before inclusion

          -  Coronary exploration: coronary angiography or tomography coronary angiography

          -  Chest pain like stable angina

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Women

          -  Severe hepatic insufficiency

          -  Inflammatory disease

          -  Neoplasia

          -  Protein S deficiency

          -  Aspirin treatment 10 days before inclusion

          -  Oral anticoagulant treatment at inclusion

          -  Heparin or low molecular weight heparin treatment at inclusion
