TITLE:
      The Effect of Protandim Supplementation on Oxidative Damage and Athletic Performance
SUMMARY:
      Nutrition supplementation with antioxidants have been discussed as a way to further enhance
      overall well-being of athletes, promote faster recovery, and improve overall performance.
      The use of Protandim, a nutritional supplement containing 5 botanicals (Bacoba extract 150
      mg; milk thistle 225mg; ashwaganda 150 mg; green tea 75 mg; turmeric 75 mg) has shown
      promise in an earlier study by reducing oxidative stress and increasing the amount of the
      anti-oxidant enzymes in the blood.

      The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of ~90 day Protandim supplementation on
      5-km running performance and on acute and long term oxidative damage as assessed by blood
      markers. Secondarily, another purpose of this study is to examine the effect of Protandim
      supplementation on measures of measures of quality of life. The experiment will be
      double-blind, placebo controlled. The study will address four specific research questions:

        1. Does regular supplementation of Protandim (675 mg/day for 90 days) reduce oxidative
           damage at rest as assessed by lipid peroxides (TBARS) in runners? Hypothesis: Based on
           the data by Nelson et al. (2006), oxidative damaged will be reduced by 40% (effect size
           = 4.8)

        2. Does regular supplementation of Protandim (675 mg/day for 90 days) in runners reduce
           the increase in oxidative damage post-race compared to pre-race as assessed by lipid
           peroxides (TBARS)? Hypothesis: Based on the data by Kyparos et al. (2009), we expect a
           45% increase in TBARS post-exercise compared to pre-exercise (effect size of 3.6).
           However, we expect that those that are on Protandim for 90 days will only have 31%
           increase in TBARS post-race (effect size = 2.5) [based on changes in pre-post lipid
           peroxides from Arent et al. (2010)]

        3. Does regular supplementation of Protandim (675 mg/day for 90 days) improve 5-km running
           times? Hypothesis: Protandim will improve 5-km running time by 0.5 min (SD 1-min). This
           is equivalent to an effect size of 0.5. The placebo group will have no change in
           performance.

        4. Does regular supplementation of Protandim (675 mg/day for 90 days) improve either the
           physical or mental component of quality of life according to the physical and
           psychological component of the WHOQOL-BREF (Skevington, Lotfy, O'Connell, & Group,
           2004)? Hypothesis: There will be a statistical improvement in the quality of life
           post-Protandim supplementation which a small effect size improvement of 0.33.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      A total of forty apparently healthy community runners 18 to 55 yrs of age will be recruited
      to participate in this study that will require approximately six total visits to the
      University of Louisville lab at Crawford gym, which includes three sessions at the running
      track (or cardio-path) at University of Louisville.

      A total of about 24 teaspoons of blood (∼120 mL, or about 2 to 3% of total blood volume)
      will be withdrawn from a peripheral vein for the duration of the study (about 105 days).
      Runners will be recruited from running clubs across the local community. Recruitment flyers
      will be posted in running stores all over the city and through the daily University of
      Louisville e-mail blasts, Facebook and other social media. These participants will be
      randomized into two groups (Protandim, Placebo). The groups will be sex and performance
      matched after the initial 5-km race is run.

      Each subject will undergo six testing sessions.

      Session 1 (Initial Screening Day)

      Subjects will sign a consent form and then they will complete a physical activity readiness
      questionnaire (PARQ) to clear them for physical activity. Age, weight, and height will be
      recorded. Subjects will be asked to list all the nutritional supplements they are taking,
      including multivitamins. They will also be asked to list the 5-km personal best time, and
      when that was done. They will also report most recent 5-km time and when that was achieved.
      Then, they will be asked to refrain from taking any multivitamins or nutritional supplements
      for the duration of the study due to the previous evidence that Vitamin E and C
      supplementation affects plasma TBARS. The subjects will record what they eat during the 24
      hr prior to the test day, and then ask them to eat the same thing and do same activity
      before the all follow up tests. Then a training diary will be given to them to fill in for
      the duration of the study. The training diary will include intensity, training duration, and
      mileage per week. After, they will be given six quality of life questionnaires [World Health
      Organization's WHOQOL-BREF quality of life assessment to fill out at home (one each for
      Session 1-6)]. A pregnancy test will also be conducted in the females.

      Session 2 (Baseline, About 15 days after Session 1)

      Subjects will be fasted in the morning when they will arrive at University of Louisville for
      their pre-exercise blood sampling. They will bring their 24-hr dietary recall with them and
      their quality of life forms. Approximately three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn 30-60
      minutes prior to exercise for analysis of several blood parameters. Then subjects will be
      required to partake in a 5-km time trial at the University of Louisville track or on the
      University of Louisville Cardio-path. The runners will race together in groups of 6 to 10
      runners per race according to their estimated 5-km time. The estimated 5-km time is their
      own best estimate. Time trials have greater logical validity compared to time-to-exhaustion
      tests (Jeukendrup & Currell, 2005) so that is why time-trials are selected as the
      performance measure.

      About 30-minutes post-exercise, another three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn from each
      subject. Only after their post-exercise blood draw will the subjects be able to eat.

      Based on the performance of the 5-km time trials, males and females will be ranked
      separately. This will be done in randomized blocks of two. Randomized blocks of two for
      males, and then randomized blocks of two for females. For example, 20 males will be ranked
      from the 5-km race from 1st (fastest runner) to 20th (slowest runner). First and second
      place males will be a block of two. Third and fourth place males will be a block of two. And
      so on. Then a fair coin will be flipped. If heads, the first ranked runner in the first pair
      will go to Group 1, otherwise, the second ranked runner in the pair will go to Group 1. This
      done for each block of two males (each pair of two males). The same is then performed for
      the 20 women. Twenty females will be ranked from first to 20th. First and second place
      females will be the first block of two. Third and fourth place females will be the second
      block of two. Then a fair coin will be flipped. If heads, the first ranked runner in the
      first female pair will go to Group 1, otherwise, the second ranked runner in the female pair
      will go to Group 1. And so one. This randomization should allow for the same mean 5-km
      running times in each group as well as maintaining similar male to female ratios.

      Session 3 (About 7 days after Session 2)

      Subjects will be fasted in the morning when they will arrive at University of Louisville for
      their pre-exercise blood sampling. They will bring their 24-hr dietary recall with them and
      their quality of life forms. Approximately three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn 30-60
      minutes prior to exercise for analysis of several blood parameters (the analytes are listed
      in Table 3). Then subject will be required to partake in a 5-km time trial at the University
      of Louisville track or on the University of Louisville Cardio-path.

      About 30-minutes post-exercise, another three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn from each
      subject. Only after their post-exercise blood draw will the subjects be able to eat.

      Depending on the Group, they will be given approximately 100 day supply of Protandim or
      Placebo (corn starch and food coloring). The study is double blinded so neither the
      researchers nor the subjects will know which group is the Protandim group and which group is
      the Placebo group. They will be asked to ingest 1 pill per day, ideally with breakfast (675
      mg per day, 1 pill per day). The subjects will be given the complete supply of pills during
      this session, right after the second blood sample is taken. The subjects will be classified
      as Group 1 or Group 2 based on their five kilometer results from the first session. The pill
      bottles will be labeled Group 1 or Group 2. The pill bottles will be dispensed by the
      research team according to group number after their second blood sample. Subjects will be
      ask to record the daily intake of the pills in their training diary. Once the study is
      completed, subjects will be asked to return the pill bottles to the research staff. That
      way, the researchers are able to account for any missed days.

      Session 4 (About 23 Days after Session 3)

      Subjects will be fasted in the morning when they will arrive at University of Louisville for
      their pre-exercise blood sampling. They will bring their 24-hr dietary recall with them and
      their quality of life forms. Approximately three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn. There
      will be no 5-km running race performed in this session. A pregnancy test will be performed
      in the females.

      Session 5 (about 30 Days after Session 4)

      Subjects will be fasted in the morning when they will arrive at University of Louisville for
      their pre-exercise blood sampling. They will bring their 24-hr dietary recall with them and
      their quality of life forms. Approximately three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn. There
      will be no running race performed in this session. A pregnancy test will be conducted in the
      females.

      Session 6 (About 30 days after Session 5)

      Subjects will be fasted in the morning when they will arrive at University of Louisville for
      their pre-exercise blood sampling. They will bring their 24-hr dietary recall with them and
      their quality of life forms. They will also bring any unused pills for proper documentation.
      A pregnancy test will be conducted in the females. then, approximately three teaspoons of
      blood will be withdrawn 30-60 minutes prior to exercise for analysis of several blood
      parameters. Then subject will be required to partake in a 5-km time trial at the University
      of Louisville track or on the University of Louisville Cardio-path.

      About 30-minutes post-exercise, another three teaspoons of blood will be withdrawn from each
      subject. Only after their post-exercise blood draw will the subjects be able to eat.

      Things to Consider

      The between subject-variability in oxidative stress biomarkers is large (Mullins et al.
      2013) and suggests that there may be responders and non-responders to an oxidative stress
      challenge (Mullins et al. 2013). Individuals who have large increases in oxidative stress
      (i.e. responders) could be reflecting an inability to regulate redox homeostasis and warrant
      additional support (i.e. with antioxidant supplementation with Protandim). It is also
      necessary to obtain week-to week and month to month coefficient of variation in markers of
      oxidative stress so that meaningful changes in these markers can be evaluated. Thus, the
      placebo group will be allow us to obtain the week-to-week and month to month coefficient of
      variation. As well, for the same reason, it is necessary to obtain week-to-week and month to
      month variation in running performance, thus, the placebo group will allow for the
      development of the coefficient of variation in performance.

      Measuring dietary data is troublesome. First, questionnaires don't give details about
      antioxidant intake - rather they give outcomes like fruit and veg intake, etc. More in depth
      measures wouldn't be worth the trouble. Thus, having subjects record what they eat (and
      their physical activity) during the 24 hr prior to the test day, and then ask them to eat
      the same thing and do same activity before the follow up tests at seven days and 90 days
      will be required.

      Environmental conditions will be recorded on the days of the three time trials (wind,
      temperature, % humidity, barometric pressure). Once all the data is collected, and the blood
      results are in, LifeVantage will reveal which group was which.

      Statistical Analyses

      Once all the data is collected and analyzed, the LifeVantage will reveal which group was
      which. The main dependent variables measured will be 5-km finishing time, TBARS, SOD, and
      both the physical and mental/psychological component of the quality of life questionnaire.
      Based on a 5-km time improvement of 2.5% or about 30 seconds (SD = 1 minute) with Protandim,
      and no improvement in the placebo group, about 32 runners in total will be needed (Effect
      size = 0.5, statistical power = 80%, alpha error probability = 5%, Correlation amongst
      repeated measures = 0.90, F-test Family, ANOVA repeated measures, between factors, G*Power
      3.1.2, Universität Kiel, Germany). Accounting for a 20% attrition rate (8 subjects), a total
      of 40 subjects will be recruited (20 per group).

      Possible Risks of Ingesting Protandim

      We do not expect there to be any side effects for the typical Protandim consumer. However,
      according to the Protandim website (http://www.protandim.com/faqs), some individuals have
      natural allergic responses to one or another of the ingredients, just as some people are
      allergic to pine pollen or penicillin. These allergic responses to Protandim generally
      appear as gastrointestinal disturbances (i.e., stomach ache, diarrhea, vomiting) or
      sometimes as a headache or rash on the hands or feet. The symptoms disappear if Protandim is
      discontinued.

      However, according to the Natural Standard Database
      (https://naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com/), each botanical has been shown to have
      rare side effects. They are listed on the next page grouped with each botanical.

      MILK THISTLE: According to the Natural Standard Database, the 225 mg dose of Milk thistle
      that is in each Protandim pill is likely safe. However, there are some rare side effects
      that may occur. Milk thistle may cause allergic skin reactions, bloating, blood clots,
      collapse, constipation, decreased platelets, diarrhea, eczema, elevated liver enzymes,
      fever, gas, giddiness, headache, heart attack, heartburn, high bilirubin (a toxic substance)
      in the blood, hives, impotence, increased creatinine, increased lactate dehydrogenase level,
      infection, insomnia, irritability, itching, joint pain, liver damage, loss of appetite,
      nausea, non-specific muscle and joint effects, pounding heart, rash, severe allergic
      reactions, sexual dysfunction, stomach distress or pain, skin pigment lightening, skin
      reactions, sweating, taste changes, tremor, vomiting, and weakness. Milk thistle may lower
      blood sugar levels.

      BACOPA EXTRACT: According to the Natural Standard Database, the 150 mg dose of Bacopa
      extract that is in each Protandim pill is likely safe. However, there are some rare side
      effects that may occur include nausea, dry mouth, thirst, and fatigue. Bacopa has been
      reported to cause palpitations (irregular heartbeats).

      ASHWAGANDHA: According to the Natural Standard Database, the 150 mg dose of ashwagandha that
      is in each Protandim pill is likely safe. However, there are some rare side effects that may
      occur. Side effects of ashwagandha include the risk of bleeding, promote low blood sugar
      levels, promote low blood pressure, and may cause drowsiness.

      TURMERIC: According to the Natural Standard Database, the 75 mg dose of turmeric that is in
      each Protandim pill is likely safe. However, there are some rare side effects that may
      occur. Side effects of turmeric include an altered heartbeat, an increase in blood volume,
      an increase in menstruation period, an increase in urine flow, changes in skin color,
      changes in cholesterol (decrease "bad" cholesterol), changes in immune function, changes in
      thyroid function, common cold, constipation, decrease in fertility (decrease sperm counts),
      decrease in iron absorption, delusion, diarrhea, gallbladder contraction, gas, giddiness,
      gout pain, hair loss (high doses), heartburn, hormone changes, inflammation of stomach and
      intestine lining, irritated or itchy skin, kidney stones, liver cell toxicity, liver
      function changes, mild fever, oxidative stress, nausea, rash, skin hardness, skin papules,
      skin redness, stomach fullness and pain, stomach ulcers, throat infection, transient
      complete atrioventricular block (a heart measurement), uterine contractions, vertigo, weight
      loss, worsening of arthritis symptoms, and yellow or hard stools. Turmeric may increase the
      risk of bleeding. Turmeric may lower blood sugar levels and blood pressure.

      GREEN TEA: According to the Natural Standard Database, the 75 mg dose of green tea that is
      in each Protandim pill is likely safe. However, there are some rare side effects that may
      occur. Side effects include affecting blood sugar and blood pressure levels.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria:

          1. Healthy, non-pregnant subjects between 18 and 55 years of age. Apparently healthy is
             classified as A-1, A-2, or A-3 according to the American Heart Association

             http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/97/22/2283/T6.expansion.html

          2. Subjects have to achieve a classification of "local class" based on age-graded time
             USA Track & Field. The age-graded time is the finish time adjusted to that of an open
             division participant using a factor for age and gender. Thus, the times for women and
             older participants are adjusted downward, while the times for most open division
             participants (such as 25-year-old men) remain the same. For example, a 55 year old
             woman has to run 29 minutes 45 seconds or better to be in the study:

             http://www.usatf.org/statistics/calculators/agegrading/

             For a man the same age, the equivalent time would be 25 minutes 2 seconds. This is
             approximately 60% of the speed of the current world record time for that age.

          3. Subjects who will abstain from taking any nutritional supplements for the duration of
             the study, including vitamins and mineral supplements (Exception, ferrous sulfate,
             elemental iron, Vitamin D, Calcium). Subjects will also abstain from taking any over
             the counter products (herbals, melatonin, St. John's Wort, etc…) for the duration of
             the study.

        The exclusion criteria will be the following:

          1. Under 18 and over 55 years of age; those who are not apparently healthy is classified
             as A-1, A-2, or A-3 according to the American Heart Association.

          2. Subjects who are not able to run 5-km in the time required for their age and gender.

          3. Subjects that will continue to take nutritional supplements, including over the
             counter products, for the duration of the study, including vitamins and mineral
             supplements (exception: Ferrous sulfate, Elemental iron, Vitamin D, Calcium).

          4. Subjects that are taking prescription medications with the exception of birth
             control.

          5. Known allergy or sensitivity to milk thistle, Bacopa monnieri, Ashwagandha, turmeric
             (or ginger), tea, its parts, caffeine, tannins, or members of the Theaceae family.
