TITLE:
      The Influence of Psychobiological Adversity to Children and Adolescents With Type 1 Diabetes
SUMMARY:
      The aims of this study are two fold: To show whether there is an increased environmental or
      genetic susceptibility to stress in patients with T1D and whether it influences diabetes
      management. And to develop a strategy for the assessment and treatment of patients with T1D
      and an increased risk for development of psychopathology under stress.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Lately, a marked increase in the incidence and earlier age of onset of type 1 diabetes (T1D)
      has been noted. These observations could also be connected to an increased prevalence of
      stressful experiences and a lowered stress tolerance in some children.

      The way a person responds to stress is determined by the interplay of genetic and
      environmental factors. Environmental experiences at specific times of development have been
      shown to shape individual's hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) stress response.
      It is known, that early development of central nervous system is critically dependent on
      child's interaction with the environment (experience dependent maturation), especially to
      the attachment to caregivers (most often the mother). Appropriate caregiving is connected to
      lower basal cortisol levels in children and a more stable HPA axis response after the
      exposure to stress. Any circumstances that disturbed the formation of the attachment to the
      primary caregiver (e.g. complications at delivery, psychosocial stressors affecting the
      mother or mother's postpartum depression) resulted in higher HPA axis responsiveness to
      stress in the affected children.

      Changes in individual genes have also been shown to influence a person's susceptibility to
      stress and risk for the development of stress-induced psychopathology.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Informed consent signed by a parent/legal guardian and informed assent signed by the
             study participant prior study entry

          -  Diagnosed with Type 1 DM/Hashimoto thyroiditis prior to signature of Patient Informed
             Consent (PIC) (for the T1D group).

          -  Age between 8-15 years old (inclusive) at signature of PIC

          -  Treated by the investigator's centre prior signature of PIC (For the T1D and HT
             group).

          -  Willing to undergo all study procedures

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Any documented concomitant chronic disease known to affect diabetes control (e.g.
             altered renal function, active cancer undergoing treatment, Crohn's disease,
             ulcerative colitis, Mb Addison disease)

          -  Any other medical, social or psychological condition that, in the investigator's
             opinion, makes the patient unable to comply with the study protocol (e.g.
             intellectual disability).
