TITLE:
      Method of Endogenous TSH Stimulation in the Follow-up of Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
SUMMARY:
      The treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer (DCT) includes surgery followed by
      radioiodine treatment. In the follow-up of patients it is necessary to induce TSH elevation
      to test for cancer recurrence. One of the options is to stop L-thyroxin replacement for
      several weeks. Current pilot study aims to induce the necessary TSH elevation by decreasing
      the L-thyroxin dose. The main hypothesis is that necessary TSH stimulation will be achieved
      during 4-6 weeks in majority of patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer (DCT) includes surgery followed by
      radioiodine treatment. In the follow-up of patients it is necessary to induce TSH elevation
      for the measurement of thyreoglobulin and/or total body scanning. There are two principal
      methods to obtain TSH elevation: 1) injection of recombinant human TSH , and 2) to stop
      L-thyroxin replacement for several (3-4) weeks. As use of recombinant TSH is rather
      expensive, this method is not feasible in many countries. The problem with stopping
      L-thyroxin is development of severe hypothyroidism for several weeks with concomitant
      symptoms and signs.

      Current pilot study aims to induce the necessary TSH elevation by decreasing the L-thyroxin
      dose. The main hypothesis is that necessary TSH stimulation will be achieved during 4-6
      weeks in majority of patients with fixed dose of L-thyroxin. Concomitantly, blood tests and
      symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism will be obtained to get information about possible
      deviations during treatment with low dose of thyroxin.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Differentiated thyroid cancer

          -  treated by thyroidectomy and at least 1 ablation with 131-I > 5 months ago

          -  TSH < 4 imU/L

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Pregnancy

          -  Known metastasis
