TITLE:
      Be Healthy in Pregnancy (BHIP) With Nutrition and Exercise
SUMMARY:
      Excess weight gain in pregnancy is a major problem affecting 55-75% of Canadian women who
      enter pregnancy overweight or obese and about 40% of women who are normal weight. Excess
      weight gain puts mothers at risk for health problems such as diabetes and developing or
      sustaining obesity after pregnancy, and puts their babies at risk of being born too large or
      developing related health problems. Mothers will be randomized to a structured high dairy
      protein diet and walking program or the usual care by their care provider. The investigators
      research questions are: Will a structured nutrition and exercise program in pregnancy
      compared to usual prenatal care increase the chance that mothers will achieve pregnancy
      weight gain within the current recommendations; improve health measures, in mother and
      infant at six months post-partum; to evaluate the benefits of a high dairy intake in
      pregnancy on maintenance of bone status in the mother and bone health outcomes in the child
      in early life (6 months); and to investigate the interactions between genes associated with
      bone health and high dairy diet supplementation on bone status in mothers during pregnancy,
      and bone health in mothers post-delivery and children to 6 months of age. Mothers' weight,
      physical activity and adherence to the nutrition plan will be assessed until birth and at
      follow-up with their infants at 6 months after birth. The research team will ensure new
      information is quickly transferred to programs to assist women to have healthier
      pregnancies.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This will be a 2-arm randomized 3-site trial. Recruitment will be within the community care
      clinics by poster and flyer advertisements. Pregnant women will be stratified by BMI
      categories and study site and randomized within strata to Group A (Nutrition+Exercise
      intervention program) or Group B (Usual Prenatal Care + Health Canada materials about
      healthy pregnancy + two focus group sessions exploring women's experiences with exercise,
      nutrition and weight gain in pregnancy).

      Primary research question: Among pregnant women, does introducing a structured and monitored
      nutrition and exercise program (treatment) in early pregnancy compared with Usual Prenatal
      Care (control) increase the likelihood of attaining gestational weight gain within the
      Institute of Medicine (IOM) guidelines over the pregnancy period? Secondary research
      questions: Among pregnant women (population), does introducing a structured and monitored
      nutrition and exercise program in early pregnancy (intervention) compared with Standard
      Prenatal Care (control) lead to 1) better maternal outcomes (outcome) at 6 months post-
      partum; and ii) better infant outcomes (outcome) at 6 months post partum?; and 2) i) to
      evaluate the benefits of a high dairy intake in pregnancy on maintenance of bone status in
      the mother and bone health outcomes in the child in early life (6 months); and ii) to
      investigate the interactions between genes associated with bone health and high dairy diet
      supplementation on bone status in mothers during pregnancy, and bone health in mothers
      post-delivery and children to 6 months of age.

      Experimental and Control groups: Both groups of mothers and their health care providers will
      be given the Health Canada materials on "Healthy Weight Gain during Pregnancy", "Eating Well
      with Canada's Food Guide" and the "Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator". Baseline information
      will be recorded for eligible and consenting women after which they will be randomized to
      Experimental or Control group. Nutrition intake, physical measures and physical activity
      will be recorded at baseline, 26-28 weeks, 36-38 weeks of gestation, and 6 months postpartum
      in the same manner for both groups. All mothers will receive the study promotional materials
      and small incentives. Also, all mothers will be followed by their primary care provider and
      have usual access to public health.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Healthy pregnant females > 18 years of age with singleton pregnancies (either
             nulliparous or multiparous);

          -  less than 15 weeks gestation;

          -  a pre pregnancy BMI < 40 kg/m2 (owing to the fact that severe obesity with BMI> 40
             may have limitations with respect to physical activity);

          -  plans to deliver at a Hamilton or London regional hospital or by home birth and
             willing to attend research visits at the community site where they were recruited;

          -  able to tolerate dairy foods;

          -  approval of primary care provider;

          -  able to provide signed informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  unable to understand some English;

          -  type 1 or type 2 diabetes;

          -  breastfeeding during current pregnancy;

          -  pregnancy resulting from in vitro fertilization;

          -  known contraindications to exercise as recommended by the Canadian clinical practice
             guidelines for pregnancy;

          -  severe gastrointestinal diseases or conditions;

          -  any significant heart, kidney, liver or pancreatic diseases;

          -  pre-existing diabetes;

          -  currently smoking;

          -  a depression score above 10 on the validated Edinburgh depression questionnaire.
