TITLE:
      Imaging of Traumatic Brain Injury
SUMMARY:
      This project aims to study the prognostic ability of various MRI imaging markers in the
      evaluation of TBI patients. Cognitive, social, and occupational recovery will be measured at
      each time point, and compared to MRI findings. Healthy volunteers will serve as a comparison
      to the TBI patients.

      It is hypothesized that novel MRI markers of metabolism, hemodynamics, functional
      connectivity, and tissue microstructure will be related to the clinical status of the
      patient, as well as their social and occupational outcomes.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The goal of this study is to identify advanced magnetic resonance imaging markers that can
      serve as a prognostic marker in the evaluation and management of traumatic brain injury
      patients.

      Magnetic resonance imaging and cognitive testing (when possible) will be performed in the
      acute (within 10 days following injury), and recovery stages (about 1 month, about 6
      months,and about 18 months). The relationship between the advanced magnetic resonance
      imaging markers and the clinical condition of the patient will be evaluated at each time
      point to determine which combination of imaging markers best describe the current clinical
      status of the patient and which markers best predict a patient's outcome status.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age 18 or older

          -  Evidence of external head injury or facial trauma, or mechanism of injury consistent
             with brain trauma, including loss of consciousness or altered mental status.

          -  Residence within 90 minutes driving time of University of Maryland Medical Center,
             and willingness to attend follow-up appointments.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  History of white matter disease or neurodegenerative disorders including Multiple
             Sclerosis, Huntington's Disease, Alzheimer's Disease, or Pick's Disease.

          -  History of Stroke

          -  History of treatment or diagnosis of psychiatric conditions: Major Depressive
             Disorder (MDD), Bipolar Disorder (BPD), Schizophrenia, or Dementia of any type.

          -  History of Brain Tumor

          -  Status post trauma due to asphyxiation

          -  Preexisting contraindications for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

          -  Active Duty Military Status

          -  Police custody or prisoner status

          -  Pregnant women
