TITLE:
      Family Spirit Study
SUMMARY:
      The goals of this study are to evaluate the effects of an in-home parenting education
      program, called Family Spirit, on parenting knowledge and skills and decreasing alcohol and
      substance use compared to a breast-feeding education. In addition, we will assess aspects of
      mother/child interaction.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To evaluate the study, we employed a randomized controlled design using a blocked
      randomization procedure. In this procedure, single woman and women with a participating
      father were randomized in equal numbers to the Family Spirit or the breast-feeding education
      program.

      Both treatment and comparison groups were assessed at multiple times. The number of times
      depended on when the participant was recruited into the program. Women recruited into the
      program between the study’s start (May 2002) and January 31, 2004 were assessed at four
      times: 1) The Pre-test occurs after informed consent (occurring at least 16 weeks before the
      birth of the infant), 2) The Mid-Test at 6-8 weeks after the delivery of the infant, 3) The
      Post-Test at 6 months post-partum (which is the end of the intervention period), and 4) The
      6-month Follow Up Test occurs at 1 year post-partum. Women recruited into the program
      between Februrary 1, 2004 and March 31, 2004 (the date recruitment ended) were assessed at
      three times: 1) The Pre-test occurs after informed consent (occurring at least 16 weeks
      before the birth of the infant), 2) The Mid-Test at 6-8 weeks after the delivery of the
      infant, and 3) The Post-Test at 6 months post-partum (the end of the intervention period).

      FHEs also conducted two instruments specific to child development: the HOME and the ITSEA.
      The Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment (HOME) was administered at the
      Post-Test and Follow-Up points (just the post-point for women recruited into the study
      between February 1, 2004 and March 31, 2004). This measure was an observatory measure
      completed by FHEs and provided a systematic measurement of the family environment. The
      Infant-Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment (ITSEA) was a self-report form completed by
      parents at their Follow-Up visit (not completed for women recruited into the study between
      February 1 and March 31, 2004). This measure assessed social-emotional problems and
      competencies in 12- to 36-month olds. FHEs also administered a Client Satisfaction Scale to
      mothers in the FSP group who completed their participation in the program. This Scale
      assessed their satisfaction with the various curricular sections and their FHE.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Native American pregnant teens or young women ages 12-22 years old at the time of
             conception.

          -  Women ages 20-22 years at the time of conception must be pregnant for the first time.

          -  Partners of pregnant teens must be between the ages of 12-24.

          -  Pregnant <28 weeks gestation and able to meet the requirements for completing the
             program in a timely way.

          -  An enrolled tribal member.

          -  Reside in the Reservation Service Unit Catchment Area and within 60 mile of the
             Indian Health Service Unit Headquarters.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Severe mental illness - schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, incapacitating depression,
             or Substance abuse/dependence in need of intensive and specific treatment

          -  Active legal problems – subjects will not be enrolled if they are incarcerated or if
             program participation has been made a condition of parole

          -  Ongoing social service involvement for abuse and neglect
