TITLE:
      Hatha Yoga Exercises in Pelvic and Lumbar Back Pain in Pregnant Woman
SUMMARY:
      The aim of this study is to identify evaluate the effectiveness of stretching exercises of
      Hatha Yoga method in pregnant women with back pain and posterior pelvic City Paulínia.
      -There will be a randomized clinical trial with 60 pregnant women with these symptoms. They
      will be randomly divided into 2 groups. The group A will perform the exercises of Hatha Yoga
      for ten weeks, once a week group B postural follow the guidelines recommended for the
      treatment of these pains, for ten weeks. Will be used as a technique for evaluating the
      Visual Analogue Scale to measure pain intensity and confirmation tests of the lumbar and
      posterior pelvic pain in order to differentiate them. A descriptive statistical analysis of
      univariate and bivariate distributions will be made through frequency and graphical
      representation. The association between the variables will be tested by statistical tests:
      [chi-square (X ²)], Fisher's exact test, Student's t test or Mann-Whitney, [Student's t test
      to compare means], ANOVA for the analysis of effects between the groups. [The significance
      level is predetermined to 5%]. The data will be analyzed in EPI-INFO 2000. SAS 9.0 and from
      the database created .
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      OBJECTIVES

      General Purpose Identify the percentage of pregnant women with spinal postural pains in
      antenatal services in the city of Paulinia and evaluate the effectiveness of the Classical
      Yoga exercises for the lumbar and posterior pelvic pains in the group of women who will do
      the exercises, as well as developments pain intensity in patients with and without exercise.

      Specific Objectives

        -  Identify the percentage of pregnant women with postural pains in the spine.

        -  Measure the intensity of pain and at the beginning and end of intervention in both
           groups.

        -  Measure the intensity of pain and at the beginning and end of each exercise session.

        -  To compare the evolution of pain - lower back and posterior pelvic pain - in the group
           with and without exercise.

        -  To compare the evolution of pain - lower back and posterior pelvic pain - in the group
           with Yoga exercises.

      ASSUMPTIONS

        -  Half of pregnant women report symptoms of postural pains in the spine.

        -  A significantly higher percentage of pregnant women who will do the Yoga exercises
           during pregnancy report improvement in pain intensity - low back and / or posterior
           pelvic pain - compared with the control group.

        -  A significantly higher percentage of pregnant women present pain intensity increased at
           the beginning compared to the end of the session.

        -  A significantly higher percentage of pregnant women report a decrease in intensity of
           back pain and posterior pelvic pain when compared to the control group.

        -  A significantly higher percentage of pregnant women report improvement in low back pain
           over the posterior pelvic pain in the group with Yoga exercises.

      SUBJECTS AND METHODS:

      Design Identification of the percentage of pregnant women with postural pains in the spine
      in health units and clinical trial, prospective, randomized and controlled.

      Sample Size To calculate the sample size was calculated as the average change in pain
      intensity referred to the global active stretching group at the end of the first and eighth
      week of treatment. The mean and standard deviation of the intensity of pain at the end of
      the first week was 4.88 SD 3.056 and at the end of the eighth week 0.85 SD 1.875 (Martins &
      PINTO E SILVA, 2005 b) The assumption is that the effect of treatment with yoga is similar
      to that found with the global active stretching.

      Considering a significance level of 5%, a test power of 80%, based on the mean difference
      reported and adopting the paired t-test, the smallest sample size required is n = 7 women in
      each group.

      However, for purposes of research and publication is suggested to adopt an "n" greater than
      30 women per group.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Lower back pain and / or posterior pelvic pain when completing the interview.
             Gestational age greater than or equal to 12 weeks.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Twin pregnancy. Medical restrictions on the exercise. Be doing physical therapy for
             the symptom of back pain and / or posterior pelvic
