TITLE:
      Safety and Tolerability of CV8102 Alone and in Combination With a Rabies Virus Vaccine in Healthy Adults
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this clinical trial is to investigate the safety and tolerability of IM
      administered CV8102 and an IM administered combination of CV8102 and rabies vaccine in
      humans.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Compliant with protocol procedures and available for clinical F/U until the
             protocol-defined end of the trial

          2. Physical examination and laboratory results without clinically significant findings

          3. Body Mass Index (BMI) ≥ 18.0 and ≤ 32.0 kg/m2

          4. Subjects must use reliable forms of contraception (barrier method with spermicidal
             agent or true abstinence) and must refrain from sperm donation during treatment and
             the 4-week F/U period after the last treatment.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Use of any investigational or non-registered product (adjuvant, drug) other than
             CV8102 within 4 weeks preceding the administration of the CV8102, or planned use of
             any such agent during the trial period

          2. Subject has received any licensed or non-licensed vaccines within 4 weeks prior to
             the administration of CV8102 alone or in combination with the licensed rabies vaccine
             or planned vaccinations during the trial period

          3. Any treatment with immunosuppressants or other immune-modifying drugs within 6 months
             prior to the administration of CV8102 alone or in combination with the licensed
             rabies vaccine. The use of inhaled and nasal steroids, as well as topical steroids
             outside the vaccination area, will be permitted

          4. Any medically diagnosed or suspected immune deficient condition based on medical
             history and physical examination

          5. History of autoimmune disease or suspected autoimmune disease based on medical
             history and physical examination that cannot be ruled out based on further
             examinations

          6. Administration of immunoglobulins (Igs) and/or any blood products within the 3 months
             preceding the administration of CV8102 or licensed rabies vaccine

          7. Acute disease at the time of enrolment. Acute disease is defined as the presence of
             any acute condition including but not limited to non-febrile or febrile common colds,
             urinary tract infections, inflammatory, allergic or traumatic conditions that may
             interfere with safety assessment of the investigational products

          8. Presence or evidence of significant acute or chronic disease, in particular heart
             disease including coronary artery disease and chronic pulmonary diseases (e.g.,
             chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]); uncontrolled medical or psychiatric
             illness (subjects with uncomplicated chronic diagnoses stable and treated for ≥ 3
             months e.g., mild hypertension well-controlled with medication, may be enrolled -
             provided the condition and its therapy are known not to be associated with an
             immunocompromised state or an autoimmune disease)

          9. Major congenital defects

         10. Known allergy to any component (or closely related substance) of the licensed rabies
             vaccine product

         11. Known type I allergy to beta-lactam antibiotics

         12. Evidence of current alcohol or drug abuse

         13. History of any neurological disorders or seizures

         14. Known seropositivity for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV)
             (except in subjects previously vaccinated against HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV)

         15. Foreseeable non-compliance with protocol as judged by the Investigator

         16. History of any life-threatening anaphylactic reactions

         17. Subjects with impaired coagulation in whom an IM injection is contraindicated.

             Additional exclusion criteria for subjects participating in the (adjuvanted) rabies
             vaccination part:

         18. Subject has previously received any investigational or licensed rabies vaccine

         19. Intending to travel to regions/countries for which rabies vaccinations are
             recommended or where high risk of infection exists according to travel
             recommendations by the German Society of Tropical Medicine and International Health
             (DTG) during the trial and F/U period

         20. Subject is taking chloroquine for malaria treatment or prophylaxis.
