TITLE:
      Detection of Human Chorionic Gonadotropin by Interferometry in Gestational Trophoblastic Disease
SUMMARY:
      We will try to use the novel analytical technique -Dual Polarisation Interferometry (DPI),to
      achieve detection the minimal amount of the human chorionic gonadotropin for early detection
      and strict monitor of the GTD.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      1 Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) consists of a spectrum of disorders that are
      characterized by an abnormal proliferation of trophoblastic tissue. They include
      hydatidiform mole, invasive mole, choriocarcinoma and placental site trophoblastic tumor
      (PSTT). The incidence of molar pregnancies in Asian countries is 7 to 10 times greater than
      the reported incidence in Europe or North America. Although previously a lethal disease, GTD
      is considered today the most curable gynecologic cancer. This progress can be attributed to
      an available tumor markerhuman chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), chemosensitivity, and the
      incorporation of aggressive multimodality therapy. However, a delay in the diagnosis may
      increase the patient's risk of developing malignant GTN and adversely affect response to
      treatment, and therefore the prompt identification of GTN is important. Approximately 20% of
      patients will develop malignant sequelae requiring administration of chemotherapy after
      evacuation of hydatidiform moles. The overall cure rate for patients with nonmetastatic
      disease and low-risk metastatic disease is nearly 100% .When chemotherapy is given for an
      additional 1-2 cycles after the first normal hCG value, recurrence rates are less than 5%.
      In contrast, in high risk metastatic disease, chemotherapy is continued until hCG values
      have normalized, followed by at least two or three courses of maintenance chemotherapy in
      the hopes of eradicating all viable tumors. Despite the use of sensitive hCG assays and
      maintenance chemotherapy, up to 13% of patients with high-risk disease will develop
      recurrence after achieving an initial remission. Conventionally, serial quantitative serum
      hCG determinations should be performed using commercially available assays capable of
      detecting β-hCG to baseline values(<5 mIU/ml). However, the amount of hCG produced
      correlates with tumor volume so that a serum hCG of 5 mIU/mL corresponds to approximately
      104 to 105 viable tumor cells. Therefore, detection of minimal amount of human chorionic
      gonadotropin (<5 mIU/ml) is crucial, it could help to early detect the GTD and strictly
      monitor the residual activity of the tumor after chemotherapy.

      Dual Polarisation Interferometry (DPI) is an analytical technique used to understand the
      real-time structure and behaviour of a wide range of molecular systems and interactions
      through quantitative measurement including molecular size, density and mass. DPI has been
      successful across a range of applications, including proteins,lipids, nucleic acids,
      lectins, surfactants, polymers, interfacial studies, surface characterisation and
      nanotechnology.

      Herein, we are trying to use the novel analytical technique -Dual Polarisation
      Interferometry (DPI),to achieve detection the minimal amount of the human chorionic
      gonadotropin for early detection and strict monitor of the GTD. Under this circumstance,
      maintenance chemotherapy is continued until hCG values is totally undetectable, in the hopes
      of eradicating all viable tumors. Besides this method could be more precise in sensitivity
      and specificity to avoid the false positive result which could led to unnecessary
      chemotherapy or surgery.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Hydatidiform Mole

          -  Choriocarcinoma

          -  Gestational Trophoblastic Neoplasms

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Unwilling to participate in the study
