TITLE:
      Bevacizumab Plus Modified FOLFOX6 Regimen as the Salvage Treatment in Metastatic Breast Cancer (MBC) Patients
SUMMARY:
      The objective of this phase II study is to evaluate efficacy and safety of avastin plus
      modified FOLFOX6 regimen in HER-2 negative metastatic breast cancer patients. Fifty-five
      patients will be enrolled into this study.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Anthracyclines and taxanes are the most frequently used agents for breast cancer,both in
      adjuvant and in first-line metastatic settings.For the patients who do not respond or
      relapse early after the administration of a taxane or anthracycline regimen,it is clearly
      needed to explore new combinations and schedules of drugs.Oxaliplatin has shown very
      promising activity in MBC either in monotherapy or in combination with 5-fluorouracil(5-FU)
      with or without leucovorin (LV). Avastin is a target therapy with proven efficacy in the
      treatment of MBC. Avastin plus FOLFOX regimen showed synergetic effet and been used as the
      standard trial in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. Based on the above reason, we
      initiate this phase II study to evaluate efficacy and safety of avastin plus modified
      FOLFOX6 regimen in HER-2 negative metastatic breast cancer patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. age>=18years

          2. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) <=2 and a life
             expectancy >= 12 weeks;

          3. histological-proven, HER-2 negative measurable stage IV disease;

          4. exposure to anthracyclines, taxanes either in the neoadjuvant/adjuvant or in the
             metastatic setting and had documented disease progression after the firstline or
             secondline treatment

          5. Patients previously treated with radiotherapy were eligible for the study, provided
             that measurable disease existed outside the radiation field.

          6. At least 3 weeks from the prior chemotherapy or radiotherapy. At least 2 weeks from
             the prior endocrine therapy.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Patients with active infection or other serious underlying medical conditions

          2. Patients had prior treatment with 5-FU infusion and/or oxaliplatin therapy

          3. Inadequate bone marrow, liver, renal, medullary, and cardiac functions

          4. Evidence of spinal cord compression or brain metastasis

          5. History of another malignancy within the last five years except cured basal cell
             carcinoma of skin and carcinoma in-situ of uterine cervix or a contralateral breast
             cancer

          6. Pregnant or lactating women

          7. Serious uncontrolled intercurrent infection

          8. History or evidence of inherited bleeding diathesis or coagulopathy with the risk of
             bleeding

          9. Serious non-bleeding wound, peptic ulcer or bone fracture

         10. Prior dihypopyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency

         11. Hypersensitivity to Chinese hamster ovary cell products or other recombinant human or
             humanlised antibodies
