TITLE:
      X-Ray Computed Tomography and Blood Reactive Oxygen Species Level
SUMMARY:
      The clinically widely used X-ray computed tomography examination has a low-grade radiation
      effect and recently has attracted much attention concerning the possible adverse effects of
      radiation on human body [ref. 1-5]. The radiation is harmful to human tissues and cells
      mainly because it can interact with water (which makes up to 80% of cells) to generate
      reactive oxygen species (ROS), especially the formation of hydroxyl radicals. So far as we
      can reach, there is no report concerning the relation between X-ray computed tomography
      examination and the blood ROS concentration. Therefore, we wish to conduct this study to
      clarify if the routinely applied X-ray computed tomography examination may induce a higher
      concentration of ROS in the peripheral blood.

      Study subjects will be participants of health check program at our hospital. The only
      enrollment condition will be a scheduled X-ray computed tomography examination for either
      lung (20 cases) or heart (20 cases) of the study subject. Another 20 participants receiving
      health check program without X-ray computed tomography examination will be included as the
      control group. The formal consent will be delivered to the participants of health check
      program several days before their admission for health check and will be retrieved before
      the proceeding of health check.

      Measurements and comparison of ROS concentration will be performed in the sampled peripheral
      blood before and after the performance of X-ray computed tomography examination during a
      regular health check program. Totally 120 blood samples will be collected from included 60
      study subjects within 3 months. Reactive oxygen species（ROS）levels will be measured by a
      chemiluminescence (CL) analysing system (CLD-110, Tohoku Electronic Industrial, Sendai,
      Japan).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Participants of health check program at our hospital who will receive a scheduled
             X-ray computed tomography examination for either lung (20 cases) or heart (20 cases).

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Those whose age are under 50 or above 70 year-olds will be excluded.
