TITLE:
      Comparison of Prevena Negative Pressure Incision Management System vs. Standard Dressing After Vascular Surgery
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of negative pressure incision
      management system (Prevena™ Incision Management System (PIMS) or ActiVAC® with the Prevena™
      Dressings (Peel and Place™ or Customizable™), KCI) in the prevention of wound complications
      including surgical site infection (SSI) and non-infectious complications in patients
      undergoing vascular surgery with groin incisions.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Complications such as surgical site infections, deep wound infections, prosthetic graft
      infections, and non-infections problems such as wound dehiscence continue to cause
      significant morbidity for patients undergoing arterial reconstruction for peripheral
      arterial disease. Patients undergoing leg bypass surgery for limb salvage are at particular
      risk due to their medical problems such as diabetes and renal failure and location of
      incisions along the groin area. Surgical site infections (SSI) are estimated to occur in
      5-40% of patients undergoing arterial bypass for lower extremity arterial occlusive disease.
      The in-hospital SSI rate is 5% across the Vascular Study Group of New England, a regional
      quality improvement registry. Factors contributing to wound infections include patient
      factors such as advanced age and comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes and renal
      insufficiency and surgical factors including the division of local lymphatics in the groin,
      placement of a prosthetic graft and inherent difficulty in keeping an incision across the
      groin crease covered, dry and protected.

      Despite the use of standard sterile technique and perioperative preventative antibiotics
      infections these complications continue to cause patient morbidity. In addition these
      complications increase the intensity and cost of care with an added estimated expense of
      $11,000 per incident. New strategies are needed to reduce these complications. Negative
      pressure wound therapy has the potential to prevent a variety of wound complications. One
      innovative strategy that has shown promise is the application of the Prevena dressing system
      over the closed surgical incision. The dressing consists of a sterile sponge that is placed
      over the incision followed by a plastic adhesive covering that is used to secure it to the
      skin forming an air-tight seal. The sponge is then connected by tubing to a vacuum that
      applies negative pressure to the closed system. This allows fluid to drain from the wound
      and into a container connected to the dressing. When compared to surgical dressing with
      sterile gauze and tape, the Prevena dressing system has the advantages of providing a
      sterile barrier, reducing tension on the incision, and removing fluid from the incision.
      Please refer to patient brochure for an illustration and further description of the Prevena
      dressing system.

      Negative pressure wound therapy has been applied for many years to enhance healing of a
      variety of open wounds including pressure wounds, diabetic ulcers, venous stasis ulcers,
      open infected surgical to traumatic wounds and burns with variable success. The treatment is
      based on evenly distributed local negative pressure applied to the wound surface. The open
      wound is filled with a sponge and covered with an occlusive dressing which is then connected
      by means of a set of suction tubes to a device which applies negative pressure on the
      surface of the wound that can be adjusted either cyclically or continuously. The fluid from
      the wound is collected into a container. The benefits of negative pressure wound therapy
      have been reported to include removal of infectious material, reduction in edema and
      improved perfusion to tissue.

      The success of negative pressure wound therapy with open wounds has been extrapolated to
      intact surgical incisions. Recently a negative pressure wound therapy dressing has been
      developed for use over closed surgical incisions.

      The investigators aim to study the ability of a negative pressure wound therapy dressing to
      prevent wound complications after vascular surgery involving incisions in the groin.

      The aim of this study is to compare the Prevena dressing system to standard surgical
      dressing in patients undergoing leg bypass surgery for vascular disease involving their legs
      in a multicenter randomized trial. All other aspects of the procedure are the part of
      standard vascular surgery practice. Patients undergoing vascular surgery with an incision in
      the groin will be treated with a standard gauze dressing or the Prevena wound management
      system which will be applied in the operating room and left on the wound for 5-7 days.
      Follow-up visits to assess the surgical wound are already standard of care. The two groups
      will be compared based on the primary and secondary endpoints listed in these documents.
      Quality of life will be compared by a patient survey and a cost analysis will be performed.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Age ≥ 18

          2. Patient undergoing vascular surgery that would include a groin incision as a standard
             part of the operation. Infrainguinal bypass including femoral popliteal/tibial/pedal
             artery bypass with autogenous or prosthetic conduit.

          3. Willing to comply with protocol, attend follow-up appointments, complete all study
             assessments, and provide written informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Any groin incision on index leg within 12 weeks prior to treatment initiation.

          2. Infrainguinal bypass without a groin incision including popliteal-tibial or pedal
             bypass.

          3. Supra inguinal procedures such as open or endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm
             repair or aorto-femoral/bi-femoral bypass for occlusive disease.

          4. Undergoing current chemotherapy or radiation therapy.

          5. Pregnancy or lactation.

          6. Inability or refusal to provide informed consent.

          7. Patients who received an investigational drug for peripheral arterial disease within
             4 weeks of screening or who participated in another non-observational clinical trial
             in the prior 30 days.

          8. Surgical incision in the groin without primary closure including previously open or
             infected wounds.

          9. Sensitivity or allergy to silver.

         10. Prior enrollment in this randomized controlled trial.
