TITLE:
      Oxygen Saturation Monitoring During Surgery
SUMMARY:
      Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) have cyclical patterns of lower blood oxygen
      during sleep because of repeated episodes of upper airway obstruction that cause their
      breathing to stop. When these patients have surgery, anesthetic drugs may worsen these
      patterns of lower blood oxygen. This study monitors ten patients at high risk for OSA and
      ten patients at low risk for OSA during surgery. Patterns of lower oxygen saturations should
      arise in the high risk group but not the low risk group.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) have episodes of upper airway obstruction during
      sleep which have been shown to be accompanied by multiple oxygen desaturations followed by
      short recovery intervals until rising PaCO2 causes sleep disruption/rescue arousal. In the
      postoperative and conscious sedation arena, these patterns can deteriorate from a stable
      pattern to a severely unstable pattern which may go unrecognized and lead to an adverse
      event (respiratory/cardiac arrest; death).

      Anesthesia and the higher consumption of analgesics produce a profound reduction in
      pharyngeal tone, a dampening of both chemoreceptor sensitivity and arousal/rescue response.
      Thus the first 48 hours post operatively presents a vulnerable period. Respiratory
      disturbances are more prominent - respiratory arrest and hypopnea being the main adverse
      occurrences during this period.

      An algorithm has been developed that monitors saturation and indicates repetitive reductions
      in airflow through the upper airway and into the lungs. Presence of this pattern in the
      procedural sedation patient population has not been tested for its prevalence. This study
      will monitor patients during surgery to determine if this pattern occurs in this hospital
      setting.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age greater than 21 years

          -  Patients scheduled for a procedure that requires analgesia and/or sedation by any
             route (intravenous, intramuscular, oral, epidural or intrathecal).

          -  Patients with an anticipated length of sedation greater than or equal to one hour.

          -  Patients in the ASA category I through III.

          -  Patients who only receive propofol, benzodiazepines, and opioids.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Age less than 21 years

          -  Patients whose room air oxygen saturation is <90%

          -  Patients receiving post-operative positive airway pressure support

          -  Previous allergic/contact reactions to adhesives

          -  CHF

          -  Moderate or severe valvular disease

          -  TIA/CVA

          -  Carotid stenosis or endarterectomy

          -  Anemia (HCT if available < 30%)

          -  Pulmonary hypertension

          -  Dialysis

          -  Pregnancy

          -  Patients unable to give informed consent
