TITLE:
      Femoral Arterial Access With Ultrasound Trial
SUMMARY:
      This study is designed to evaluate the routine use of vascular ultrasound as an aid for
      proper placement of a femoral arterial sheath during cardiac catheterization and peripheral
      arterial angiography.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Cardiac catheterization is conventionally performed with femoral arterial access using a
      combination of arterial pulse palpation, anatomical landmarks, and fluoroscopic landmarks to
      guide needle insertion. Vascular access complications including hematoma formation,
      retroperitoneal bleeding, and arterial dissection are the most common types of adverse
      events associated with cardiac catheterization, and have been associated with insertions
      above and below the level of the common femoral artery. Real-time ultrasound assistance for
      central venous catheter placement has been proven in multiple studies to reduce
      complications, and has been recommended by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality as
      a "Top 11 Highly Proven" patient safety practice. This recommendation has not yet been
      extended to arterial access, due to a lack of studies to date. However, ultrasound
      assistance is licensed for and commonly utilized for arterial access, especially in
      difficult patients.

      In a pilot study of 71 procedures performed by the lead researcher, ultrasound guidance was
      associated with an improved 1st pass success rate (83% vs 47%, p=0.002), reduced risk of
      accidental venipunctures (0% vs 25%, p=0.002), and greater overall success in common femoral
      artery cannulation (89% vs 69%, p=0.048) as compared with the fluoroscopic control.

      This study is a multicenter prospective randomized trial to generalize the above findings
      with more patients studied, a larger number of operators, and across several centers.
      Similar to the previous study, the ultrasound will be used real-time to visualize the
      femoral vein, femoral artery, and needle tract as the needle is inserted, to guide the
      needle towards the appropriate location in the artery. The time for insertion, number of
      passes, complications, and position of the insertion catheter on the femoral angiogram will
      be analyzed in the setting of patient factors including age, body mass index, and presence
      of peripheral vascular disease.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Adults age 18 and over

          -  Patients undergoing left heart catheterization or peripheral arterial angiography
             from the retrograde femoral approach

          -  Willingness and ability to sign consent form

          -  Scheduled to have procedure performed by operator trained in the ultrasound technique

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Access from a site other than the common femoral artery

          -  Nonpalpable femoral pulses

          -  Creatinine > 3.0 mg/dl, unless already on dialysis

          -  Prisoners

          -  Pregnant women

          -  Unable or refusal to sign consent form

          -  Patients undergoing emergent cardiac catheterization for ST segment elevation
             myocardial infarction or unstable acute coronary syndrome

          -  Equipment unavailable
