TITLE:
      RNActive® Rabies Vaccine (CV7201) in Healthy Adults
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this trial is to assess the safety and immunogenicity of an investigational
      RNActive® rabies vaccine (CV7201) in healthy adults.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Healthy male and female volunteers aged 18 to 40 years inclusive

          2. Compliant with protocol procedures and available for clinical follow-up through the
             last planned visit (V9)

          3. Physical examination and laboratory results without clinically significant findings

          4. Body Mass Index (BMI) ≥ 18.0 and ≤ 32.0 kg/m2

          5. Females: Negative human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) pregnancy test (serum) for women
             presumed to be of reproductive potential on the day of enrolment

          6. Females of childbearing potential must use acceptable methods of birth control during
             the trial and Follow-up period (from 6 weeks before the first administration of the
             test vaccine for the duration of the trial i.e., until the last planned visit (V9)).
             The following methods of birth control are acceptable when used consistently and
             correctly: established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods of
             contraception; intrauterine devices (IUDs) or intrauterine systems (IUSs) with the
             exception of steel or copper wire; barrier methods of contraception (condom or
             occlusive cap [diaphragm or cervical/vault caps] with spermicidal
             foam/gel/film/cream/suppository); true abstinence (periodic abstinence [e.g.,
             calendar, ovulation, symptothermal and postovulation methods] and withdrawal are not
             acceptable).

          7. Males must use reliable forms of contraception (barrier method with spermicidal agent
             or true abstinence) and must refrain from sperm donation during the trial and
             Follow-up period i.e., until the last planned visit (V9).

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Use of any investigational or non-registered product (drug or vaccine) other than the
             trial vaccine within 4 weeks preceding the administration of the trial vaccine, or
             planned use during the trial period

          2. Subject has received any other licensed vaccines within 4 weeks prior to the
             administration of the trial vaccine

          3. Subject has received any investigational or licensed rabies vaccine previously

          4. Intending to travel to regions/countries for which rabies vaccinations are
             recommended or where high risk of infections exists according to travel
             recommendations by the German Society of Tropical Medicine and International Health
             (DTG) during the trial and up to V9 (Day 91/120) Follow-up

          5. Any treatment with immunosuppressants or other immune-modifying drugs within 6 months
             prior to the administration of the trial vaccine. The use of inhaled and nasal
             steroids, as well as topical steroids outside the vaccination area, will be permitted

          6. Any medically diagnosed or suspected immunodeficient condition based on medical
             history and physical examination

          7. History of autoimmune disease

          8. Administration of immunoglobulins (Igs) and/or any blood products within the 3 months
             preceding the administration of the trial vaccine

          9. Subject is taking chloroquine for malaria treatment or prophylaxis

         10. Acute disease at the time of enrolment. Acute disease is defined as the presence of a
             moderate or severe illness or fever ≥ 38 °C measured orally

         11. Presence or evidence of significant acute or chronic, uncontrolled medical or
             psychiatric illness (subjects with uncomplicated chronic diagnoses stable and treated
             for ≥ 3 months e.g., mild hypertension well-controlled with medication, may be
             enrolled - provided the condition and its therapy are known not to be associated with
             an immunocompromised state or an autoimmune disease

         12. Major congenital defects

         13. Known allergy to any component of the trial product i.e., protamine. This includes
             subjects with allergy to fish protein, diabetics with allergy to protamine-containing
             insulin, or post-vasectomy males

         14. Known type I allergy to beta lactam antibiotics

         15. Evidence of current alcohol or drug abuse

         16. History of any neurological disorders or seizures, with the exception of febrile
             seizures during childhood

         17. Seropositivity for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV)
             (except in subjects previously vaccinated against HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV)

         18. Foreseeable non-compliance with protocol as judged by the Investigator

         19. For females: Pregnancy or lactation

         20. History of any life-threatening anaphylactic reactions.

         21. Subjects with impaired coagulation in whom an IM injection is contraindicated.
