TITLE:
      Extended Out-of-hospital Low-molecular-weight Heparin Prophylaxis Against DVT and PE in Patients Undergoing Major Lung Resection
SUMMARY:
      Postoperative venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a significant health-care problem, resulting
      in significant morbidity, mortality and resource utilization. The true incidence is unknown,
      and may range from 1% to 15%. At the current time, the clinical practice of VTE prophylaxis
      in thoracic surgery includes administration of unfractionated or low molecular weight
      heparin starting at the perioperative period and finishing at the time of patients'
      discharge. In orthopaedic surgery, prolonged thromboprophylaxis beyond 10 days and up to 35
      days has become the standard of care. There is a clear need to systematically evaluate the
      incidence of VTE after resection of lung malignancies and to evaluate the role of extended
      VTE prophylaxis in preventing Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolus (PE) after
      those major lung resections. This study will involve patients undergoing lung resection for
      malignancy at St. Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton and the University Health Network's Toronto
      General Hospital. The study will include 150 consecutively recruited patients. Study
      interventions will include Computed Tomography with pulmonary embolus (PE) protocol and
      bilateral extended leg Doppler Ultrasound for the detection of Deep Vein Thrombosis 30 days
      post-surgery.

      In summary, this study is aimed at evaluating, for the first time in a prospective manner,
      the actual incidence of DVT and PE in patients undergoing major lung resections for
      malignancies. The knowledge gained in this study will be used to inform a future
      investigation involving a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) to compare current
      post-operative thromboprophylaxis with an extended 30-day prophylaxis protocol with the hope
      of providing an evidence-based practice change in VTE prophylaxis care for this high risk
      population.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Postoperative venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a significant health-care problem, resulting
      in significant morbidity, mortality and resource utilization. The true incidence is unknown,
      and may range from 1% to 15%. The latest American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP)
      guidelines on VTE prevention clearly outlines the perioperative thromboprophylaxis regiments
      for specific surgical populations. Specifically for patients undergoing orthopaedic
      procedures, such as total hip replacement, there is strong Grade 1A evidence for the use of
      extended thromboprophylaxis. For other surgical subgroups such as vascular and thoracic
      surgery, the evidence is less clear.

      Therefore at the current time, the clinical practice of VTE prophylaxis in thoracic surgery
      includes administration of unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin starting at the
      perioperative period and finishing at the time of patients' discharge. Prolonged
      thromboprophylaxis in orthopaedic surgery beyond 10 days and up to 35 days has become the
      standard of care and has Grade 1A recommendations from ACCP. This approach has never been
      tested or validated in thoracic surgery, where major lung resection exposes the patient to
      an increased VTE risk not only due to the surgical stress and existence of malignancy, but
      also due to direct in-situ vascular injury secondary to resection of pulmonary arterial
      branches during the lung resection. Hence, there is a clear need to systematically evaluate
      the incidence of VTE after resection of lung malignancies and to evaluate the role of
      extended VTE prophylaxis in preventing DVT and pulmonary embolus (PE) after those major lung
      resections.

      The study will involve patients undergoing sub-lobar resection, lobectomy, bilobectomy or
      pneumonectomy for lung cancer or metastatic lung disease at St. Joseph's Healthcare
      Hamilton, a regional tertiary thoracic surgery program with more than 350 major lung
      resections performed within the institution annually, as well as the University Health
      Network's Toronto General Hospital. The study will evaluate the incidence of post-operative
      venous thromboembolism (VTE) and will include 150 consecutively recruited patients. Study
      interventions will include Computed Tomography with pulmonary embolus (PE) protocol and
      bilateral extended leg Doppler Ultrasound for the detection of Deep Vein Thrombosis 30 days
      post-surgery.

      In summary, this study is aimed at evaluating, for the first time in a prospective manner,
      the actual incidence of DVT and PE in patients undergoing major lung resections for
      malignancies. The knowledge gained in this study will be used to inform a future
      investigation involving an RCT to compare current post-operative thromboprophylaxis with an
      extended 30-day prophylaxis protocol with the hope of providing an evidence-based practice
      change in VTE prophylaxis care for this high risk population.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patient Inclusion Criteria

          -  At least 18 years of age

          -  Either gender

          -  Diagnosed with resectable lung cancer or metastatic lung disease eligible to complete
             metastasectomy

          -  Undergoing one of the following surgeries: Segmentectomy, wedge resection, lobectomy,
             bilobectomy or pneumonectomy

          -  Competent to understand and sign consent documents

        Patient Exclusion Criteria

          -  Known allergic or anaphylactic reaction to contrast dye, heparin or low molecular
             weight heparin (LMWH)

          -  Under current anticoagulation for venous thromboembolism or other medical conditions

          -  Known renal impairment, defined as creatinine clearance value of less than
             55ml/min/m2 as calculated by the Cockroft-Gault method

          -  History of, or ongoing liver disease, manifested as ascites or previous peritoneal
             tapping for ascites

          -  Pregnant or planning to become pregnant

          -  Diagnosed or treated for VTE in the past 3 months prior to surgery

          -  Present or previous increase risk of haemorrhage

          -  History of previous HIT (heparin induced thrombocytopenia)

          -  Platelet count must be below 75,000

          -  Previously inserted Inferior Vena Cava Filter (IVC) filter.
