TITLE:
      Does Discontinuation of Aspirin Treatment Following Head Trauma Decrease the Incidence of Chronic Subdural Hematoma?
SUMMARY:
      Anti-aggregation therapy, including treatment with low-dose aspirin (LDA) is an established
      risk factor for intracranial hemorrhage, including chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH); however
      evidence guiding the decision to continue or discontinue LDA in patients who have sustained
      mild head trauma with no sign of injury on CT is lacking. The investigators aim to assess
      whether continued aspirin treatment increases the risk of CSDH in mild head trauma patients
      50 years and older who present with negative head CT. The investigators further aim to use
      the initial findings to refine the study design, with the goal of performing a larger,
      multi-institutional study in the future.

      Over a 12-month period, approximately 100 patients ≥50 years of age on LDA prophylaxis
      presenting to Hadassah's Emergency Department after sustaining mild head injury, will be
      examined by the neurosurgeon on call. Those who have no sign of intracranial hemorrhage at
      clinical or CT examination, and who meet inclusion / exclusion criteria, will be invited to
      participate in a randomized study. Informed consent will be obtained. Patients will be
      remotely randomized for continuation or cessation of LDA treatment. Follow-up CT and
      clinical examination will be performed 3-5 weeks after trauma.

      The two-proportions test will be used to assess whether there is a statistically significant
      difference in the rate of CSDH in patients randomized to cessation of LDA therapy and those
      randomized to continuation of LDA. Relationships between the explanatory the dependent
      variables will be explored with classical parametric and nonparametric statistical methods,
      including multivariate analysis, logistic regression, the two proportions test, and the
      independence test. Several measures of association/correlation between pairs of variables
      will be analyzed as well.

      The investigators hypothesize that continuation of LDA will not be associated with increased
      risk for chronic subdural hematoma, and that cessation of treatment will not be associated
      with a decrease in chronic subdural hematoma. The investigators further hypothesize that
      cessation of LDA for this period will not be associated with increased risk for clinically
      significant cerebrovascular, cardiovascular, thrombotic, of embolic event.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Scientific Background Chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH) is a well-described sequelae of minor
      head trauma in the elderly population. Known risk factors for the development of this
      condition are old age, previous bleed, intracranial hypotension, and anticoagulant or
      antiaggregant therapy prior to the trauma [1-3, 10].

      Anti-aggregation therapy, including treatment with low-dose aspirin (LDA) is an established
      risk factor for the development of a CSDH. Among patients presenting with a chronic subdural
      hematoma, 16-76% have a history of antiaggregation therapy [6, 9, 13], however it remains
      unclear whether the increased risk is related to treatment prior to the trauma or to the
      continued treatment with LDA after the trauma, while the hematoma is supposedly developing.

      This has implications for daily clinical practice. It is unclear whether continued
      antiaggregation therapy after a minor head trauma increases the risk for development of a
      CSDH, and therefore it is unclear whether cessation of such treatment after a minor head
      trauma is indicated.

      We aim to assess whether continued aspirin treatment increases the risk of CSDH in mild head
      trauma patients 50 years and older who present with negative head CT.

      Brief Review of the Literature The risk of bleeding complications associated with LDA
      prophylaxis has been extensively reported. In 2006, McQuaide and Laine [4] performed a
      systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the relative and absolute risk of clinically
      relevant adverse events in patients treated with LDA or clopidogrel for cardiovascular
      prophylaxis. They included randomized controlled trials comparing cardiovascular outcomes
      and adverse events in patients treated with placebo, LDA, and clopidogrel from 1966-2004 in
      their analysis. The authors found a very modest 0.3% (3 patients per thousand) increase in
      the absolute risk of intracranial bleeding associated with the use of aspirin, although CSDH
      in the wake of head trauma was not specifically discussed.

      A year earlier, Serebruany et al [11] compared the risk of hemorrhage associated with <
      100mg, 100-200mg, and > 200mg doses of aspirin in a meta-analysis of 31 studies involving
      192,036 patients. They reported major bleeding events (intracranial bleeding; overt bleeding
      with decrease ≥ 5g/dl in hemoglobin or ≥ 15% in hematocrit) in 1.5% of patients on doses <
      100 mg, 1.5% of patients at 100-200 mg, and 2.3% of patients on the highest dose. Incidence
      of CSDH was not reported.

      Aspirin has been associated with an increased risk for postoperative intracranial hemorrhage
      [5, 7], and CSDH [13] However in spite of the strong evidence that aspirin treatment
      increases the risk of intracranial hemorrhage, there is a surprising dearth of research
      guiding the decision to continue or discontinue aspirin in patients who have sustained mild
      head trauma with no sign of injury on CT.

      Tauber et al [14] recently assessed the incidence of secondary intracranial hemorrhage in a
      prospective study of 100 mild head trauma patients 65 years and older on LDA prophylaxis.
      Primary CT scan in all participants revealed no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage. Repeat
      CT, performed within 12-24 hours, revealed secondary intracranial hemorrhage leading to
      death in one patient, surgical intervention in one, and conservative management with an
      uneventful clinical course in two patients. The authors recommended repeat CT after 12-24
      hours or 48-hour in-hospital observation for elderly patients on LDA prophylaxis.

      In 2003, Spektor et al. investigated the role of LDA prophylaxis in the evolvement of acute
      traumatic findings after a mild-to-moderate head injury [12]. They evaluated 231 patients,
      comparing those on aspirin treatment to those who were not. Interestingly, the authors found
      no significant increase in the frequency of intracranial hemorrhage in patients receiving
      prophylactic LDA treatment, however they did not assess the incidence of delayed bleeding.

      In 1992, Reymond et al reviewed the characteristics of 39 patients who developed chronic
      subdural hematoma in a population of 198 patients admitted after severe head trauma with
      various forms of intracranial bleeding on original CT [8]. They found that risk factors for
      intracranial hemorrhage were age, alcohol consumption, and anticoagulation or
      antiaggregation therapy. Five (13%) patients with chronic subdural hematoma had been treated
      with aspirin. The authors concluded that patients on prophylactic LDA treatment are at risk
      of developing chronic subdural hematoma.

      Several other studies retrospectively evaluated the role of LDA treatment in the evolution
      of chronic subdural hematomas. The proportion of patients with chronic subdural hematoma who
      were treated by aspirin varied widely. O'Brien et al reported treatment w LDA in 93 of 123
      (76%) patients with spontaneous hematomas [6]. On the other end of the scale, Rust et al.
      reported this treatment in only 18 of 81 patients (22%) [9] and Stroobandt in 16 of 100
      (16%) [13].

      Two studies reported no effect of aspirin treatment on the recurrence rate of chronic
      subdural hematomas after drainage. Torohashi et al [15] retrospectively reviewed 343
      consecutive patients treated with surgical drainage for CSDH and subsequent recurrence.
      Patients were advised to discontinue anticoagulation and antiaggregation for one week after
      initial drainage. The authors found no statistically significant relationship between
      anticoagulation or antiaggregation therapy and recurrence of CSDH, however recurrence
      occurred with a shorter interval in patients treated with anticoagulation or antiaggregation
      therapy.

      Research Objectives Assess whether continuation of low-dose aspirin therapy increases risk
      for development of chronic subdural hematoma in the 3-5 weeks following mild head trauma in
      patients 50 years and above.

      Assess whether cessation of LDA therapy decreases the risk for development of chronic
      subdural hematoma in the 3-5 weeks following mild head injury in patients 50 years and
      above.

      Assess whether cessation of LDA therapy is associated with an increase in clinically
      significant adverse events, including myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attack, or
      vascular or thrombo-embolic events in the 3-5 weeks following mild head trauma in patients
      50 years and above.

      Establish a study protocol that may serve as the basis of a larger and more definitive
      multi-institutional study.

      We hypothesize that continuation of LDA will not increase the risk of CSDH in the 3-5 week
      follow-up period after minor head trauma.

      We hypothesize that discontinuation of LDA for 3-5 weeks will not be associated with an
      increase in the number of in clinically significant cardiovascular events.

      Expected Significance There is currently no consensus regarding the continuation or
      cessation of prophylactic aspirin treatment following mild head trauma in patients with no
      immediate evidence of hemorrhagic injury. The evidence-based knowledge that will be gained
      in this study, and from larger multi-institutional studies will have significant clinical
      implications.

      Methods All patients seen in Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center's Department of
      Emergency Medicine after head trauma are examined by the neurosurgeon on call. A complete
      history is taken, and patients undergo a thorough physical and neurological examination.
      Patients reporting to the Emergency Department after mild trauma who are treated with LDA at
      the time of injury are routinely referred for immediate non-contrast head CT. Blood tests to
      assess prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, INR, and platelet count are performed.
      A detailed history is taken to ascertain the reason for aspirin therapy. Patients with head
      CT that is negative for traumatic findings, and with normal neurologic examination or no
      change from neurological baseline before trauma, are discharged from the emergency
      department. The policy regarding continuation or discontinuation of LDA after mild head
      trauma is not well established.

      We propose to offer patients aged 50 and above who suffer mild head trauma, who are on LDA
      therapy (75-100 mg) at time of trauma, who have normal neurological examination or no change
      from neurological baseline before trauma, no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage on initial
      CT, and who meet other inclusion and exclusion criteria, participation in a randomized trial
      to assess the effects of aspirin continuation versus aspirin cessation.

      Intake- and follow-up examinations will be completed according to standard forms that will
      be used by all physicians involved in the care of participants in the study (Appendix 1-2).
      Informed consent will be obtained (Appendix 3). Patients will be randomized. An attending
      neuroradiologist will read the admission CT. Patients with a finding of intracranial
      hemorrhage, or possible intracranial hemorrhage will be excluded from the study and followed
      appropriately by a physician from the Department of Neurosurgery.

      Two weeks after injury, a study nurse will contact patients by telephone, to schedule
      follow-up CT and clinic evaluation, with follow-up reminders as needed. Follow-up clinical /
      neurological examination and head CT will be performed 3-5 weeks after injury. Achieving
      follow-up CT 3-5 weeks after the injury is routine in the patients' population included in
      this study.

      At final assessment participants will be evaluated for clinical or imaging evidence of CSDH
      as well as other intracranial hemorrhage, or cardiac, thrombotic, or embolic condition. In
      the case of a clinically significant adverse cardiovascular or cerebrovascular event, the
      IRB will be notified, and the patient will be treated as appropriate for the clinical
      situation. At study completion, LDA prophylaxis will be prescribed for individual patients
      as clinically indicated, with cardiology or other consultation as appropriate.

      Informed Consent The attending neurosurgeon will fully explain the basis for the study and
      its clinical importance, as well as the risks involved with the continuation or cessation of
      LDA prophylaxis, and invite the eligible patient to participate in the study. Eligible
      patients who are fully conscious and who agree to participate in the study, or their legally
      authorized representatives, will be asked to sign an informed consent form (Appendix 3).
      Patients with no legal guardian who suffer from dementia or any other concurrent illness
      which prevents them from giving informed consent, will be excluded from the study.

      Randomization Randomization of all participants will be performed remotely via an online
      program.

      Patients in arm 1 will be requested to continue their aspirin therapy according to previous
      instructions; those in arm 2 will be requested to cease aspirin therapy for the initial 3-5
      weeks following their mild head trauma.

      Primary Endpoint

        -  Occurrence of CSDH Secondary Endpoints

        -  Intervention for surgical evacuation of CSDH

        -  Occurrence of other clinically significant intracranial hemorrhage

        -  Intervention for surgical evacuation of other intracranial hemorrhage

        -  Occurrence of clinically significant cerebrovascular, cardiovascular, thrombolic, or
           embolic event

        -  Intervention for treatment of cerebrovascular, cardiovascular, thrombolic, or embolic
           event

      The possible relationship between LDA prophylaxis and a variety of other demographic and
      clinical variables will also be assessed, including patient age and gender, coagulation
      profile, mechanism of injury, loss of consciousness, and time elapse from traumatic head
      injury to any clinically significant sequelae. We will assess the relationship between
      aspirin cessation and incidence of clinically significant events in patients with ischemic
      heart disease.

      Statistical Analysis Since the incidence of CSDH in patients on LDA is has not been studied
      directly, it is not currently possible to estimate the number of patients required to
      achieve statistical power for this research. Study enrollment will continue through the
      first year, with an estimated 100 participants in this period. Based on preliminary findings
      at that point, we expect to determine the total required study population.

      The two-proportions test will be used to assess whether there is a statistically significant
      difference in the rate of CSDH in patients randomized to cessation of LDA therapy and those
      randomized to continuation of LDA. Relationships between the explanatory the dependent
      variables will be explored with classical parametric and nonparametric statistical methods,
      including multivariate analysis, logistic regression, the two proportions test, and the
      independence test. Several measures of association/correlation between pairs of variables
      will be analyzed as well.

      With the pilot data from 100 patients, our statistician will be consulted to perform a power
      analysis to assess the required sample size to have a greater than 80% chance of detecting a
      significant difference between the two groups at significance level of p < 0.05.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Completion of informed consent by the patient or a legally appointed guardian

          -  Age ≥ 50 years

          -  Sustained mild head trauma with visit to the emergency department of the
             Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center within 24 hours after trauma

          -  Low-dose aspirin therapy (75-100 mg) at time of head trauma

          -  Admission non contrast head CT with no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage or skull
             fracture, as assessed by the neurosurgical resident on call and confirmed by an
             attending neuroradiologist

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Documented or suspected myocardial infarction within the last 12 mo

          -  Documented or suspected transient ischemic event or cerebrovascular accident within
             the last 12 months

          -  Coronary intervention within the last 6 mo

          -  Vascular stenting or bypass within the last 6 mo

          -  End-stage renal failure requiring dialysis

          -  Treatment with aspirin dose other than 75-100 mg

          -  Concomitant treatment by anti-coagulant or other anti-aggregant (e.g. warfarin, low
             molecular weight heparin, or clopidogrel)
