TITLE:
      Levothyroxine Treatment for Subclinical Hypothyroidism After Head and Neck Surgery
SUMMARY:
      Patients that require treatment for cancers of the head and neck often require a combination
      of surgery and/or radiation and chemotherapy. Hypothyroidism is one of the most common
      complications, and has been associated with post-operative complications such as wound
      healing problems, fistula formation, and decreased quality of life and survival. Several
      studies have examined hypothyroidism after radiation to the head and neck, but few have
      examined this after non-thyroid head and neck surgery. Head and neck resection is theorized
      to devascularize the thyroid, thus resulting in post-operative hypothyroidism.

      Synthroid is a synthetic thyroid hormone often used in cases of patients with proven
      hypothyroidism and after surgical thyroid removal. It's use has been in effect and studied
      for over fifty years.

      Treatment algorithms for hypothyroidism are well published. However, treatment of
      subclinical hypothyroidism (elevated TSH with normal or near-normal T3/T4) is controversial.
      The rate of subclinical hypothyroidism after non-thyroid head and neck surgery is high (up
      to 20%), and is associated with post-operative complications as noted above.

      Therefore the investigators propose a double blinded randomized controlled trial comparing
      outcomes of patients that develop subclinical hypothyroidism after head and neck surgery,
      who are given a standardized dose of synthroid treatment versus those treated with placebo.
      The main outcomes to be examined are post-operative complications (wound healing issues,
      fistula formation), survival, and quality of life measures.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background and Scope:

      Hypothyroidism is one of the most common complications following multimodality treatment for
      head and neck cancer, with an incidence of 7-58% depending on the subsite. The causes for
      this high rate of hypothyroidism following treatment for head and neck cancer are
      multifactorial. Patients treated for head and neck cancer often require radiation therapy
      (RT). The negative effects of RT on the thyroid are well published, and the resultant
      hypothyroidism can have widespread implications on a patient's physical and mental health.
      Head and neck surgery has also been hypothesized to devascularize and disturb the overall
      anatomical structure of the thyroid, thus contributing to the high incidence of
      hypothyroidism after surgery.

      Despite the literature demonstrating the connection between head and neck cancer treatment
      and hypothyroidism, complications from this illness after major head and neck surgery remain
      common. Decreased survival as well as increased rates of fistulas, infections, and wound
      breakdown are some of the physical consequences. Other possible issues include decreased
      functional outcomes and increased mental illness, as these are known consequences of
      untreated hypothyroidism. While several studies have examined the rate and timing of
      hypothyroidism after radiation to the head and neck, there is a paucity of literature on the
      effect of surgery on thyroid function. Specifically, in patients treated with single
      modality surgery, and in patients treated with primary surgery before the start of RT, when
      the risk of wound complications is high.

      Synthroid is a synthetic thyroid hormone, and is the mainstay of treatment of patients with
      proven hypothyroidism and after surgical thyroid removal. Its use has been in effect and
      studied for over fifty years. Side effects of the drug most commonly occur with overdosing
      and will mimic those of hyperthyroidism, which may include: heart palpitations, abdominal
      pain, nausea, anxiety, confusion, agitation, insomnia, weight loss, and increased appetite.
      There is a low chance (< 1%) of allergic reaction to the drug, which may include shortness
      of breath, swelling of the face and tongue.

      Whereas treatment algorithms for clinical hypothyroidism are well established, treatment of
      subclinical hypothyroidism remains controversial. Subclinical hypothyroidism refers to a
      state of elevated thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), with normal or near-normal thyroid
      hormone levels (T3 and T4), or a lack of symptoms of hypothyroidism. Endocrinologists
      disagree on whether this disease should be treated, since it is almost always asymptomatic,
      and the treatment is mainly for relief of symptoms. Head and neck cancer patients, however,
      represent a special population, in which the effects of subclinical hypothyroidism can
      result in consequences besides symptoms, such as wound healing issues and fistula
      development as described above. Studies have shown that the rate of subclinical
      hypothyroidism during head and neck cancer treatment is high.

      Therefore the investigators propose a single blinded randomized controlled trial comparing
      outcomes of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism, who are given a standardized dose of
      synthroid treatment after head and neck surgery versus those treated with conventional
      therapy. A secondary goal of this study is to determine the rate of clinical and subclinical
      hypothyroidism after surgical treatment for head and neck cancer, without RT or before the
      start of RT.

      Objectives:

      Primary Objectives:

        -  To assess the effect synthroid treatment in patients with subclinical hypothyroidism
           following head and neck surgery and it's effects on survival, gastrostomy tube (G-tube)
           rates, fistula formation, wound breakdown, and infection.

      Secondary Objectives

        -  To determine the rate of clinical and subclinical hypothyroidism after surgery for head
           and neck cancer

        -  To determine the factors that are predictive of the development of clinical and
           subclinical hypothyroidism after surgery for head and neck cancer

      Methods:

      This is a single-center double blinded randomized placebo-controlled trial of the effects of
      synthroid treatment immediately after surgery for head and neck cancer. Patient meeting
      eligibility criteria will be identified at the time of booking for surgery and approached by
      a member of the research team.

      Data will be collected from the medical records on the variables under study in
      study-specific data sheets. Data sheets will then be de-identified and input into a secure
      database that will be password protected hard drive in a room that is locked. Data will then
      be exported for statistical analysis when collection is complete.

      The population will be comprised of patients who underwent surgery with or without a
      combination of RT and/or chemotherapy for the treatment of non-thyroid head and neck cancer.
      Surgery is defined as surgical resection with primary closure or reconstruction with
      loco-regional flaps or autogenous free tissue transfer. RT is defined as curative dose
      therapy. Chemotherapy is defined as any single agent therapy or combination of cisplatin or
      carboplatin. Patients will be prospectively enrolled starting from March 1, 2015 until March
      1, 2016. The expected accrual of this patient group will be 200 patients. The demographics
      of head and neck mucosal cancers indicate that the male : female ratio will be 3 : 1 and the
      mean age will be approximately 60 years with a range of 18 - 85 years.

      In order to assess pre- and post-operative thyroid function, each patient will undergo blood
      testing including TSH, free T3, and free T4 levels one week prior to surgery, and weekly
      following surgery, up to 8 weeks post-operatively (if not receiving radiation), or until 8
      weeks after the start of radiation (if receiving radiation therapy).

      Patients will be classified into "normal" (normal TSH and normal free T3 and free T4
      levels), "hypothyroid" (elevated TSH, decreased free T3 and free T4), or "subclinical
      hypothyroid" (elevated TSH (4-10mIU/L), normal free T3 and free T4).

      Patients with "normal" thyroid function will not be randomized to any treatment arm, but
      their post-operative outcomes will be recorded, according to section 8.0. Patients who are
      "hypothyroid" will be treated for their hypothyroidism according to the standard of care, in
      keeping with American Thyroid Association (ATA) / American Association of Clinical
      Endocrinologists (AACE) guidelines.

      Patients with "subclinical hypothyroidism" will be randomized to either the treatment arm or
      placebo arm, at the time of discovery of subclinical hypothyroidism (lab value abnormalities
      as noted above). Patients who are randomized to the treatment arm will be treated with a
      standard dose of 1.6mcg/kg/day of synthroid, and the target of treatment will be a
      normalized TSH (0.2-4.0mIU/L), measured at 6 weeks after treatment, according to ATA/AACE
      guidelines.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Biopsy proven head and neck cancer, as defined by AJCC staging system

          -  Treated with surgery in Edmonton, Alberta

          -  Treated with curative intent

          -  Diagnosis of sub-clinical hypothyroidism after head and neck surgery (TSH 4-10mIU/L,
             and free T4 10-24pmol/L)

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Head and neck cancer of the thyroid gland, or other subsite involving the thyroid
             gland

          -  Underwent previous treatment for a different head and neck cancer

          -  History of radiation therapy and or chemotherapy to the head and neck

          -  History of thyroid disease as follows:

          -  Hypothyroidism

          -  Hyperthyroidism

          -  Autoimmune thyroid disease including Grave's disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis

          -  History of thyroiditis

          -  History of diabetes mellitus

          -  History of long term steroid usage

          -  History of immunocompromise

          -  History of thyroid surgery

          -  History of ischemic heart disease

          -  Age >80

          -  Patients taking a medication that may alter the metabolism or interact with
             levothyroxine, which they cannot safely stop (see Appendix A).
