TITLE:
      A Prospective Randomized Study Evaluating the Recurrence Rate of Chronic Subdural Hematoma After Placing a Subperiosteal Drainage Compared to a Subdural Drainage
SUMMARY:
      The aim of our study is to investigate in randomized controlled fashion whether the
      recurrence and complication rate, after insertion of subperiosteal drainage in the treatment
      of chronic subdural haematoma, is higher compared to insertion of subdural drainage.

      We hypothesize that patients treated with a subperiosteal drainage do not show higher
      recurrence rates than those treated with a subdural drainage, and suffer less complications.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Chronic subdural haematoma (cSDH) is one of the most frequent neurosurgical entities,
      affecting elderly people and associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Its
      incidence is reported to be 1.7-13.1 per 100000 inhabitants per year, yet there has been a
      steady increasing incidence as the result of prolonged life expectancy in recent years.
      Surgical treatment is recommended in case of neurological symptoms. In the only evidence
      based review of the different surgical treatment modalities of cSDH, Weigels study group
      concluded that bure-hole craniostomy with irrigation and drainage has the best cure to
      complication ratio. A randomized controlled study of Santarius and his colleagues showed a
      reduced recurrence and mortality while placing a subdural drainage compared to no drainage
      after burr hole evacuation of cSDH. Gazzeri et al. and Zumofen et al. used closed
      subperiosteal drainage instead of the commonly used subdural drainage. They showed equal or
      superior results in outcome, complications and postoperative symptoms compared to previous
      studies. Since the subperiosteal drainage is not positioned in direct contact to cortical
      structures, bridging veins or haematoma membranes it is considered safer and should be
      favored over a subdural drainage. Bellut et al. compared in their institute retrospectively
      48 patients treated with subperiosteal drainage to 65 patients with subdural drainage and
      found no difference in recurrence rate of cSDH, yet less mortality and fewer serious
      complications in the group treated with subperiosteal drainage. However in their study none
      of the results showed a significant difference, and they concluded that further randomized
      studies with larger patient number are needed. In a recently published prospective
      randomized study Kaliaperumal et al. concluded that the recurrence rate in subperiosteal
      drainage is equal to subdural drainage, yet the modified ranking scale(mRS) of the patients
      with subperiosteal drainage after 6 months was significantly better. However, the mRS score
      preoperative were better in the subperiosteal drain group causing a statistical bias. In
      addition the amount patients studied was small (25 per group) and the recurrence rate was
      overall at 0%, with a very low morbidity and mortality compared to the literature. Due to
      these bias the authors recommend further prospective and randomized studies with larger
      group of patients.

      To date in neurosurgery practice evidence based guidelines on which drainage should be used
      in cSDH do not exist and both methods, subdural drainage and subperiosteal drainage, are
      being practiced, depending on the institute and/or the practicing neurosurgeon.

      The aim of our study is to investigate in randomized controlled fashion whether the
      recurrence and complication rate, after insertion of subperiosteal drainage in the treatment
      of chronic subdural haematoma, is higher compared to insertion of subdural drainage.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patient at least 18 years of age presenting with a symptomatic chronic subdural
             hematoma

          -  Chronic subdural hematoma verified on cranial CT or MRI

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  A subdural drainage cannot be placed due to intraoperative circumstances (e.g. brain
             unfolds)

          -  The surgeon decides based on intraoperative conditions to perform a craniotomy (e.g.
             acute hematoma indicating a craniotomy)

          -  Chronic subdural hematoma caused by another underlying illness (e.g. caused by
             over-drainage of a vp-shunt)

          -  no informed consent
