TITLE:
      Diagnosing Pneumonia Under Low-resource Conditions
SUMMARY:
      Pneumonia is the commonest cause of death in children worldwide, killing 1.5 million
      children under the age of 5 years, every year. This is more than the number of children
      dying from AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis combined. The current diagnostic and management
      protocols for managing serious respiratory diseases in children are 30 years old and are
      greatly in need of updating. The successful establishment of useful clinical management
      criteria for children with respiratory diseases will have benefits for children in low
      resource regions around the world. The goals of the study are:

        -  To determine if children with respiratory distress can be reliably diagnosed under
           low-resource conditions.

        -  To identify the clinical tests that best differentiate pneumonia from wheezy diseases.
           These will be used to establish updated diagnostic criteria for common pediatric lung
           diseases that broaden the current pneumonia algorithm by adding another for wheezy
           illnesses.

        -  The ultimate objective is to improve the management and outcome of acute respiratory
           conditions in children.

        -  Investigators also wish to test the efficacy of a locally developed cell phone oximeter
           probe in a low resource setting.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Study organisation. This is a prospective observational study run simultaneously in four
      Indian public hospitals (King George Medical University, Lucknow; Regency Hospital, Kanpur;
      Vanivilas Hospital, Bangalore; Bowring and Lady Curzon Hospital, Bangalore). The study
      started in Oct 2012 to cover the Indian respiratory viral season. In order to maintain high
      standards of data collection, a post-graduate research coordinator is employed at each
      hospital. Because of the use of standardised scoring systems and the need for accurate
      clinical data collection, a member from the Canadian team spent a week at each centre
      familiarising local research team members with the study protocol and standardised scoring
      systems. This was followed by a one week trial period of data collection and electronic
      transmission of files to Canada.

      Diagnostic definitions and standardised scores. The primary problem facing any study of
      pneumonia is accurate diagnosis. The overlap of clinical and radiological findings between
      severe viral infections, asthma and bacterial pneumonia can make it difficult to determine
      which febrile tachypneic children have wheezy diseases and which ones would benefit from
      antibiotic treatment. In many low-resource areas, this is further complicated by infectious
      diseases, such as malaria and dengue, which can have similar presentations. Early WHO
      tachypnea-based diagnostic protocols were intentionally over-sensitive to ensure that all
      children with bacterial pneumonia received antibiotics. Later attempts were made to improve
      the detection of wheezy diseases, by adding audible wheeze or acute bronchodilator response
      to the basic criteria. However, these were shown to be imprecise, particularly amongst the
      sickest children.

      Investigators chose to formalize the diagnostic method described by Sachdev et al who
      classified patients into four groups (pneumonia, wheezy disease, mixed and non-respiratory)
      based on consultant review of a detailed history and examination plus a chest radiograph
      (CXR). Investigators recorded 29 items from a protocol that included history, examination,
      CXR and oximetry (see table). In order to combine results from data collection between
      centres, standardised scoring systems for conscious level and auscultation findings were
      used. For chest radiographs, a modification of the recently updated system recommended by
      the WHO was used. During the one week preparatory period, the system was explained to all
      involved ER physicians and pediatricians using examples and practice interpretation.

      Study protocol. All children below 5 years age who present to the emergency rooms of the
      study hospitals with cough or difficulty breathing of less than 5 days, are identified. If
      their initial respiratory rate met WHO criteria for pneumonia, the study is explained by a
      native speaker of their primary language and they are invited to enter the study. Families
      are not paid to enrol but the study covers the cost of a CXR for every child plus travel
      expenses for outpatients to return for review on day four. After enrolment, twenty nine
      features of the child's history, examination and CXR are assessed by the ER physician and
      recorded by the study coordinator(Table 2).

      After reviewing the data, the ER physician is asked to place the child into one of four
      diagnostic categories: pneumonia, wheezy disease (asthma and bronchiolitis), mixed (evidence
      of pneumonia and wheeze) and non-respiratory (malaria, dengue etc). The ER physician is
      solely responsible for subsequent management decisions. All study patients are reviewed four
      days later by a qualified pediatrician who is blinded to the ER physician's CXR
      interpretation and diagnosis. Based on a review of the clinical data at presentation, plus
      subsequent course over 4 days and a second examination, the pediatrician places the patient
      into one of the four diagnostic categories. This is considered the child's final diagnosis
      for analysis.

      Statistical analysis. Logistic regression analysis will be used to determine which of the
      initial clinical variables had the best predictive power for pneumonia and asthma. The best
      cut-off values for continuous variables were established using receiver operating curve
      analysis. For each predictive variable, sensitivity, specificity plus positive and negative
      predictive value will be calculated from conventional tables using standard equations. When
      the predictive value of combining variables is tested, investigators will link them as 'A
      and/or B'. This increases sensitivity but decreases specificity, compared to using 'A and
      B.' Continuous variables will be displayed as mean +/- one standard deviation. Categorical
      variables will be displayed with box and whisker plots where the whiskers represent full
      range.

      Table of investigations performed in the ER at presentation.

      History Recorded details Cough yes/no Difficulty Breathing yes/no Lethargy yes/no Reduced
      feeding yes/no Fever yes/no Previous similar episodes number Vaccinations number and type

      Examination Recorded details Age months Weight weight for age 'z' score Temperature ⁰
      Celsius Heart rate beats/minute Respiratory rate breaths/minute Indrawing present/absent

      Responsiveness score:

      A fully alert V responds to voice P responds to pain U unconscious

      Auscultation score:

      Chest clear normal vesicular breath sounds Crackles coarse or fine inspiratory
      crackles/rattles Wheeze high pitched whistling noise, inspiratory or expiratory Crackles and
      wheeze both sounds present Bronchial breathing tracheal breath sounds heard over the lungs

      Investigations Recorded details

      CXR score: one or more of:

      Normal ) Hyperinflation ) Minor patchy changes ) definitions, see table 3 Major patchy
      changes ) Lobar changes ) Pleural fluid ) Oximetry % oxygen saturation
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All children below 5 exceeding WHO age-dependent tachypnea criteria.

        Exclusion Criteria:
