TITLE:
      Echo Detection of Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Air Embolus
SUMMARY:
      Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is an endoscopy technique to visualize
      and evaluate the pancreatic and biliary systems. It has been reported that rare instances of
      air embolus have been found associated with the performance of an ERCP and many of these
      events are fatal. It is our proposal to use transthoracic echocardiography to continuously
      evaluate for the presence of intra-cardiac air secondary to ERCP venous air embolism and
      attempt to quantify the incidence of this complication and any potential patient factors
      that might increase the risk of this complication.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is commonly used in the diagnosis and
      treatment of biliary and pancreatic disease. There are case reports presented in the
      literature demonstrating adverse and often fatal events following air embolization
      associated with the performance of ERCP. The frequency of air embolus is extremely rare with
      the exact incidence unknown. In recent years the utilization of echocardiography to evaluate
      individuals with hemodynamic instability has led to the discovery of intracardiac air
      embolus seen in those individuals that demonstrated changes in either hemodynamic parameters
      or capnography values. There exists proposed mechanisms for the translocation of air from
      the foregut to the systemic venous circulation but not one of these mechanisms has yet been
      validated. Some proposed mechanisms include either through intrahepatic mechanisms where air
      crosses from the biliary tract to hepatic venules or potentially from the foregut into the
      portal vein and through shunt vessels into systemic venous circulation.

      The exact frequency of air embolus is likely higher than the incidence of fatal or
      near-fatal complications reported in the literature. Individuals that had the best outcomes
      were usually intubated and had capnography to demonstrate a change suggestive of air embolus
      prior to significant hemodynamic changes.1 As this phenomenon has not previously been well
      described, it is possible that other patients suffer significant air embolus with myocardial
      or cerebral ischemic sequelae that were not recognized because echocardiography was not used
      as an early tool for evaluation of hemodynamically unstable patients. It is also possible
      that there are a number of patients that may suffer a venous air embolus from ERCP that is
      sub-clinical and therefore not causing enough change in cardiac function to alter either
      hemodynamic parameters or capnography values. The literature suggests that if a patient does
      not awake following ERCP, that imaging modalities, such as echocardiography be employed for
      evaluation.1 Understanding the frequency of this problem or which subgroups are at risk can
      further aid in the diagnosis and treatment of this complication.

      Transthoracic echocardiography is a highly sensitive imaging modality and if adequate
      imaging windows can be obtained will demonstrate the presence of intracardiac air. The risk
      of performing the study on the patient is zero to very low. The potential risk of inaccurate
      interpretation should be avoided by the use of trained individuals in the acquisition and
      interpretation of transthoracic echocardiographic images.

      The purpose of this study is to 1) identify individuals scheduled to undergo elective ERCP
      as part of their plan-of-care and perform transthoracic echocardiography for surveillance of
      intracardiac air embolus 2) record aspects of their past medical history that may
      potentially contribute to increased risk of systemic venous air embolus. This evaluation has
      not been presented in the literature and the primary end-point of this study would be to
      determine the frequency at which venous air embolus associated with ERCP occurs.

      All individuals that meet inclusion criteria will be approached and consented in the
      pre-operative area prior to the planned procedure (ERCP). Their past medical history will be
      reviewed with the patient and special attention placed on particular co-morbid conditions
      that might be related to this phenomenon including but not limited to: portal hypertension,
      cirrhosis, portal vein thrombosis, and recent liver biopsy. The patient will then proceed to
      the procedure room as planned and while the patient is placed in the left lateral decubitus
      position and induced under anesthesia. An echocardiography-trained anesthesiologist will
      perform a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) concurrently while the gastroenterologist is
      performing the ERCP. We plan on conducting serial images at least every ten to fifteen
      minutes throughout the ERCP and more often as needed. At the conclusion of the procedure
      (ERCP) if there are no significant findings on TTE the patient will be returned to the
      supine position and taken to the recovery room. The written record of the TTE will then be
      entered into the study database within a separate research chart. In the event that the TTE
      shows the presence of intracardiac air embolus during the procedure the member of the study
      group performing the TTE will notify the endoscopist and anesthesia provider of the findings
      if the findings are significant enough to require a change in the patient's medical care.
      Reference to the algorithm will be made in each case and be available online if needed.
      Unless a moderate to severe embolic event occurs, the findings will not be communicated to
      the gastroenterologist so that he is blinded to the result maintained in the research chart.
      The purpose of this is to keep clinically insignificant emboli from being reported in the
      patient's medical record.

      One of the key components of this evaluation is determining whether the presence of an air
      embolus has occurred and if so, has it had a negative effect on the function of the
      subject's cardiovascular system. Our proposed evaluation of the myocardium using
      transthoracic echocardiography includes evaluation of the left ventricle, right ventricle
      and pulmonary artery pressures. In the event there is hemodynamic instability as a result of
      impaired function of the right or left ventricle, an evaluation including measurements of
      the following parameters will assist in determination of the problem:

        1. Right ventricular function, specifically tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion
           (TAPSE and the presence of hemodynamic changes.

        2. Left ventricular function, specifically diastolic function, systolic function and
           myocardial performance index.

        3. Pulmonary artery systolic pressure, via evaluation of the tricuspid regurgitant jet
           maximum velocity using the modified Bernoulli equation.

        4. Presence of a new right-to-left intracardiac shunt or bowing of the intraatrial septum
           from right-to-left indicating a new increase in the right atrial pressure.

        5. Significant changes in hemodynamic status that would indicate that the subject does not
           have effective filling and ejection of the left ventricle to support a perfusing blood
           pressure. This may manifest as hypotension and/or tachyarrhythmias on standard
           intraoperative monitoring.

      As this protocol evaluates the frequency and degree of air embolization into the systemic
      venous system during the performance of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
      (ERCP), the following four subgroups have been identified to help define the identification
      and treatment of subjects enrolled into IRB 238-11. Each category has a) criteria for the
      visual quantification of the air seen and b) the cardiac function and hemodynamic changes
      seen and finally c) the planned intervention if needed:

        1. No air embolism:

             1. No visualized air emboli during the procedure.

             2. Subjects have no hemodynamic or myocardial changes attributable to the occurrence
                of venous air embolus.

             3. No changes would be made to the standard care of this research subject as a result
                of the absence of findings. Findings will be entered into the research chart.

        2. Small air embolism:

             1. A small, but identifiable quantity of air visualized that does not form a large
                collection and does not obscure visualization of the far-field.

             2. Subjects have no changes in myocardial function and maintenance of hemodynamics.

             3. The subject would then undergo follow-up evaluation by a member of the study group
                at the conclusion of their normal post-op recovery period. No additional time
                would be required for evaluation and documentation of hemodynamic stability and
                follow-up echocardiography findings would be recorded in the research chart.

        3. Moderate air embolism :

             1. Identifiable intracardiac air within the heart that obscures the far-field due to
                its size but does not cause a sharp demarcation at the blood/gas interface.

             2. Subjects have documented impairment of myocardial function and/or hemodynamics
                compared to baseline but do not require emergency resuscitation to correct.

             3. The subject would remain in the left lateral decubitus ("safe position" for
                individuals with suspected or confirmed venous air embolism) for four hours.
                Laboratory tests including cardiac enzymes may be obtained and a member of the
                study team will re-evaluate with transthoracic echocardiography. If baseline
                function and hemodynamics return, the subject concludes their recovery period as
                per normal circumstance for ERCP. In the event the subject has persistent
                intracardiac air, impaired myocardial function or hemodynamic instability, it
                would be recommended that the subject stay for observation with telemetry
                monitoring and further evaluation as needed.

        4. Large air embolism:

             1. Identifiable intracardiac air which collects into a large enough bubble to cause
                sharp demarcation at the blood/gas interface and obscures the far-field.

             2. Left and/or right ventricular failure with hemodynamic collapse.

             3. The subject would require emergency resuscitation and ACLS protocol in addition to
                placement of invasive monitors for evaluation. Attempts to extract intracardiac
                air using central venous catheter will be made and as needed intubation with
                transfer to the ICU for further monitoring. Consultation for hyperbaric oxygen
                therapy would be pursued and all measures would be taken to recover hemodynamic
                function.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Subject is undergoing ERCP as part of their medical care

          -  Subject will be of age 19 or older

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Subject positioning for the ERCP is prone, thereby inhibiting the performance of the
             TTE

          -  Subject intolerance of the pressure of the TTE probe

          -  Subject body habitus interferes with obtaining adequate images to assess for
             intra-cardiac air
