TITLE:
      Healthy Body Study
SUMMARY:
      Few obesity prevention programs have produced weight gain prevention effects that persist
      over long-term follow-up and those that have are extremely lengthy, averaging 52 hr in
      duration, making implementation difficult and costly. The 2010 US Preventative Services Task
      Force (USPSTF) recommendations for treating child & adolescent obesity state that programs
      should have ≥ 25 hr of comprehensive treatment including dietary, physical activity and
      behavioral counseling, and that programs with < 25 hr usually do not produce improvements.
      The implication is that, if centers cannot provide this level of service (as most cannot),
      it is not worth providing any kind of treatment at all. In extreme exception to this, an
      intensive 3-hr non-restrictive obesity prevention program involving participant-driven
      healthy lifestyle improvement plans designed to bring caloric intake and output into balance
      (Healthy Weight) has been found to significantly reduce increases in BMI and obesity onset
      relative to alternative interventions and assessment-only controls through 3-yr follow-up.
      We propose to test an extended 6-hr version of the Healthy Weight intervention in a sample
      of primarily low SES, minority adolescents and young adults who are overweight and report
      body dissatisfaction and subthreshold eating disorder symptoms, as these are prevalent risk
      factors for obesity. We will test the hypothesis that participants assigned to the Healthy
      Weight vs. control intervention will have significantly lower BMI and % body fat during
      follow-up. Secondary outcomes will include body dissatisfaction, depressive symptoms, and
      eating disorder symptoms. 300 adolescents and young adults at high risk for future weight
      gain by virtue of their age, BMI percentile, body dissatisfaction and eating disorder
      symptomatology will be randomized to Healthy Weight or weight control educational video.
      Participants will complete assessments of BMI, body composition, potential mediators, and
      other outcomes at pretest, posttest and 6--mo follow-ups (in yr 1). Thus, to refute the
      USPSTF recommendations statement, we propose to show that a 6-hr intervention led by
      graduate students can produce significant reductions in risk for both obesity and eating
      disorders, suggesting this inexpensive and brief intervention could and should be rolled out
      nationwide.

      Primary Aim: To test the hypothesis that Healthy Weight will significantly reduce increases
      in BMI, % body fat, and risk for onset of obesity during follow-up.

      Secondary Aim: To test the hypothesis that Healthy Weight will significantly reduce body
      dissatisfaction, depressive symptoms, and eating disorder symptoms.

      NOTE: THIS STUDY IS ONLY OPEN TO PATIENTS AT THE MOUNT SINAI ADOLESCENT HEALTH CENTER
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Obesity is associated with increased risk of mortality, atherosclerotic cerebrovascular
      disease, coronary heart disease, colorectal cancer and death from all causes (Flegal et al.,
      2005), is credited with over 111,000 deaths annually in the US (Flegal et al., 2005),
      shortens the lifespan by 5-20 years (Fontaine et al., 2003) and results in $150 billion in
      annual health-related expenditures (Finkelstein et al., 2009). Despite alarming increases in
      both adult and childhood obesity in recent decades, obesity rates in adolescents have grown
      at an even faster rate (Ogden et al., 2012; NCHS, 2012). Adolescent obesity has more than
      tripled in the past 30 years and continues to rise (Ogden et al., 2012; NCHS, 2012). Obese
      adolescents are more likely to have high cholesterol and high blood pressure, prediabetes,
      bone/joint problems, sleep apnea, and social and psychological problems such as
      stigmatization and poor self-esteem (DHHS, 2010; CDC, 2011). Unfortunately, virtually all
      obesity treatments result in only transient weight loss (Turk et al., 2009). Evidence
      suggests that it is nearly impossible for individuals to maintain behavioral weight losses
      once they have been obese for an extended period of time (Ochner et al., 2013). Although
      bariatric surgery can result in more persistent weight loss, this invasive procedure is
      contraindicated for numerous individuals, particularly children (Martin et al., 2010). Thus,
      a pressing public health priority is to develop simple and effective obesity prevention
      programs.

      In 2010, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) issued recommendations for
      screening and treating childhood and adolescent obesity. They endorsed comprehensive
      moderate-to high intensity programs including counseling for weight loss, healthy diet, and
      physical activity as well as instruction and support for the use of behavioral management
      techniques including self-monitoring, stimulus control, eating management, contingency
      management, and cognitive behavioral therapy techniques. The USPSTF further defined
      moderate- to high-intensity programs as > 25 hr of contact and states that "such
      interventions would not be feasible for implementation in a primary care setting." (USPSTF,
      2010, p. 365). Further, they assert that less intensive (< 25 contact hours) programs do not
      produce significant improvements. "Low-intensity interventions, defined as < 25 contact
      hours over a 6-month period, did not result in significant improvement in weight status"
      (USPSTF, 2010, p. 364). The implication is that, since most centers cannot provide this
      level of service, it is not worthwhile for adolescent health centers to provide any kind of
      obesity intervention at all. According to the USPSTF's website, "its recommendations are
      considered the gold standard for clinical preventive services." Such recommendations could
      discourage the testing and implementation of brief interventions designed to prevent
      obesity. Thus, to refute USPSTF statement, we propose to show that a 6-hr intervention led
      by graduate students can produce significant reductions in risk for both obesity and eating
      disorders, suggesting that this brief and inexpensive intervention could and should be
      rolled out nationwide.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  ≥ 12 years old

          -  Body image concerns

          -  Sub-threshold Eating disorder symptomatology

          -  Overweight but not obese (BMI between the 85th and 95th percentile for
             children/adolescents and BMI between 25 and 30 kg/m2 for adults 21-24)

          -  Be able to commit to weekly 1-hour sessions for six weeks and 3 separate assessment
             visits to the MSAHC

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Current eating disorder (anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa or binge eating disorder)

          -  absence of body image concerns

          -  normal or obese body weight (< 85th or ≥ 95th BMI percentile)
