TITLE:
      Bioequivalence Study of Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd's Felodipine Extended-Release Tablets Under Fasting Condition
SUMMARY:
      Objective:

      Primary objective of the present study was to compare the single dose bioavailability of
      Torrent's Felodipine Extended-Release Tablets USP 10 mg and Innovator's (Mylan
      Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA) Felodipine Extended-Release Tablets USP 10 mg. Dosing periods
      were separated by a washout period of 17 days during fasting study.

      Study Design:

      Open-Label, Randomised, two Period, two treatment, Crossover, Single-Dose Bioequivalence
      Study
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Healthy males within the age range of 18 to 50 years.

          -  A body mass index within 18-25 Kg/m2.

          -  Given written informed consent to participate in the study.

          -  Absence of diseases markers of HIV 1 & 2, Hepatitis B & C virus and RPR.

          -  Absence of significant disease or clinically significant abnormal laboratory

          -  values on laboratory evaluation, medical history and physical examination during the
             screening.

          -  A normal 12-lead ECG.

          -  A normal chest X-Ray.

          -  Comprehension of the nature and purpose of the study and compliance with the
             requirements of the entire protocol.

          -  No history or no evidence of hypersensitivity or idiosyncratic reactions to other
             nitrates or nitrites.

          -  No history of allergic rash.

          -  No history of significant systemic diseases.

          -  No history of psychiatric disorders or addiction to any recreational drug or drug
             dependence.

          -  No donation of blood within 56 days prior to study check-in.

          -  No participation in any clinical study within the past 56 days.

          -  No receipt of any prescription drugs or OTC products, with in two weeks prior to
             study check-in.

          -  No history of dehydration from diarrhea, vomiting or any other reason within a period
             of 24 hours prior to study check-in.

          -  No family history of neurological disorders.

          -  Not consumed alcohol and xanthine containing food and beverages, cigarettes and
             tobacco products, for at-list 48 hours, prior to study check-in.

          -  Negative results for drugs of abuse in urine and alcohol breath analysis during
             check-in of each period.

          -  Not consumed grape fruit juice within the 48 hours prior to study check-in.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Blood pressure Systolic> 140 mm Hg and < 110 mm Hg Diastolic< 70 mm Hg > 90 mm Hg

          -  History of seizures

          -  History of alcohol consumption for more than 2 units/day.

          -  High caffeine or tobacco consumption

          -  History of difficulty with donating blood or difficulty in accessibility of veins.

          -  Any unusual or abnormal diet, for whatever reason e.g. fasting due to religious
             reasons.

          -  Used any pharmacological agents known to significantly induce or inhibit drug
             metabolizing enzymes within 14 days of the start of the study
