TITLE:
      Observational Study With Prospective and/or Retrospective Follow-up, Without Modifying Patient Treatment and Follow-up Practices for the Initial Treatment of Hypothyroidism in France
SUMMARY:
      This observational survey with prospective and/or retrospective follow-up is designed to
      study practices for the initial treatment of hypothyroidism in France without modifying
      subject treatment.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Thyroid disorder can be central, caused by a deficiency in thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
      production; or peripheral, caused by the decrease in the plasma concentration of thyroid
      hormones, more specifically of free thyroxine (free T4). Peripheral hypothyroidism is caused
      by the decrease in the production capacities of the thyroid gland.

      The treatment of hypothyroidism is based on the restoration and maintenance of biological
      (judged on the basis of the standardised TSH and T4 values) and clinical euthyroidism.

      A number of forms of thyroid hormones are available in the French market (Euthyral®,
      Cynomel®, L-thyroxine drops®), of which, Levothyrox® is the most frequently prescribed drug
      in this category.

      The treatment of peripheral hypothyroidism, in particular, is well codified and almost
      consensual. In France, there is no published observational study, based on which one can
      document the manner in which subjects are treated. This observational study is set up to
      document these practices.

      OBJECTIVES The principal objectives of this survey is to to get information on the use of
      Levothyrox in France

        -  Circumstances of diagnosis

        -  Record realised

        -  Terms and conditions of treatment by the general practitioner and/or the
           endocrinologist

      The secondary objective is to evaluate the inclusion criteria for levothyroxine treatment.

      For each subject the participating doctor will complete a follow up questionnaire form until
      the first control level of TSH after the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Recently diagnosed hypothyroid subject (either during the inclusion period, or within
             the 6 previous months) for whom, data related to the diagnosis is available if the
             diagnosis was not carried out initially by the investigating doctor

          -  Subject, who has given his/her oral consent for participation

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Subject included in clinical trial or having participated in a clinical trial during
             the last 3 months

          -  Subject presenting a major and objectifiable risk of not being able to follow-up
             until the next TSH level (moving, problems encountered during another study,
             pathology affecting the vital prognosis in the short-term)

          -  All contraindications to Lévothyrox
