TITLE:
      Multimodal Neurodiagnostic Imaging of Traumatic Brain Injury and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine whether the brains of persons with and without
      traumatic brain injury differ in a meaningful way when advanced technology images of the
      brain are taken using three newer technologies that visualize the brain using a combination
      of external/internal magnetic fields and radioactive tracers (molecules that emit detectable
      particles). The hope is that the results of this study will validate tools (help prove that
      diagnostic tools actually detect disease) for the diagnosis and treatment of traumatic brain
      injuries (TBI).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      'Normal' appearing brain is often not normal when imaged with advanced neuroimaging
      techniques. It has been advocated that a battery of neurological assessments (including MEG)
      be developed to assess mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) and studies have shown that
      somatosensory evoked fields in severe TBI can serve as a measure of cortical function in
      comatosed TBI patients. Functional neuroimaging techniques such as PET and fMRI may reveal
      abnormalities in areas considered 'normal' on traditional MRI. Most significantly, advanced
      functional neuroimaging may enable customized neurorehabilitation planning with more
      efficient use of resources.

      The study aim is to compare healthy brains, civilian TBI brains, and combat-related TBI to
      identify correlations between abnormal imaging parameters with neurorehabilitation potential
      utilizing advanced neurological imaging.

      The study hypothesis states Severity of Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and Post-traumatic
      Stress Disorders (PTSD) can be detected and quantified using a multimodal battery of
      neurodiagnostic imaging techniques (MEG, PET/CT, 3 Tesla-MRI w/ DTI and fMRI) and
      rehabilitation potential can be predicted in the post acute phase.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. At least 18 years of age and non-active duty

          2. Either:

               1. Normal (no history of head injury) -OR-

               2. TBI (injury since Jan. 1, 2002)

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Incapable of informed consent or absence of legally authorized representative.

          2. Incarcerated (or subject to court supervision).

          3. Known allergy to protocol contrast/imaging agent (or pregnant and unable to receive
             agent)

          4. MRI incompatible (i.e. implant, metal, > 300 lbs, severe claustrophobia)
