TITLE:
      Electrical Skin Conductance Monitoring as an Assessment of Post Operative Pain Scores
SUMMARY:
      Pain has been defined as a subjective experience. Various pain assessment tools, (such as
      NRS) have been developed and validated to objectively monitor and treat pain. There are
      certain patient populations, in whom, the current pain assessment tools cannot be used
      effectively due to communication problems such as cognitively impaired patients. In the US,
      the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) has made it
      mandatory to monitor and treat pain. In the absence of reliable pain assessment tools that
      would objectively measure pain, there is also risk of under treatment and overtreatment of
      pain that may lead to negative outcomes. Therefore, a monitor that is able to predict pain
      levels objectively, will help to achieve above goals. The investigators are using Skin
      Conductance Algesimeter (SCA) to measure pain by analyzing changes in skin conductance.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients undergoing unilateral THR and TKR who are between the ages of 18 and 85
             regardless of the anesthesia and postoperative analgesia type.

          -  Patients participating in other studies may participate in this study as well

          -  Patients with Motor Activity Assessment Scale (MAAS) Score of 3 and 4

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Age <18, >85

          -  History of chronic pain as defined by use of long acting opioid medication > 6 months
             duration.

          -  MAAS Score of <3 and >4.

          -  Anticholinergic agent use

          -  Patients with the following conditions:

        Autonomic neuropathy

          -  Pacemaker/AICD

          -  Burn patients or patients with severe dermatologic conditions (as defined by skin
             conditions causing further pain to patients that actively has to be treated)

          -  Allergy to adhesive tape

          -  Communication barriers

          -  Bilateral Procedures

          -  Patient with diagnosis of

          -  Dysautonomia

          -  Sympathetic dysfunction such as: Raynaud disease, Buerger disease

          -  Disorders of sweating such as: Acquired idiopathic generalized anhidrosis
