TITLE:
      Causal Inference Research of Resistant Hypertension Treatment With Chinese Approach in a Cohort Study
SUMMARY:
      Background: Syndrome differentiation is one of the substantial characteristics in
      Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) but is still lack of scientific evidence. The inference
      methods of causal relationship between treatment and clinical effect under real-world study
      may help.

      Objectives: This study aims to assess the efficacy of Phlegm and Stasis Syndrome
      differentiation method in treating resistant hypertension and explore causal inference in
      the real-world study.

      Research design and methods: It is a multicenter, prospective, two-arm, cohort study
      including 200 patients with resistant hypertension (doctors' diagnosis based on the American
      Heart Association criteria 2008). Essential hypertension subjects, aged 18-70 years, blood
      pressure > 140/90 mm Hg even used to be on 3 or more medications for a month and diagnosed
      as Phlegm and Stasis Syndrome will be included. Thiazide diuretics and/or two more
      antihypertensive agents for 8 weeks, Chinese herbs (for synchronic treating phlegm and blood
      stasis) and nonpharmacological recommendations were initiated in the observational group and
      the control group received the same interventions without Chinese herbs.

      Outcome measures: The primary outcomes will be Systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood
      pressure reductions and changes in symptoms and signs. Cardiac event and death incident will
      be the secondary outcomes. Possible side effects and adverse reactions arising from the
      treatment like diarrhea will be recorded.

      Discussion: This is a rigorous methodology pilot study and 200 participants is enough to
      calculate sample size in later formal trial.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Essential hypertension subjects, aged 18-70 years, blood pressure > 140/90 mm Hg even
             used to be on 3 or more medications for a month and diagnosed as Phlegm and Stasis
             Syndrome will be included.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients will be excluded for the following conditions: with secondary resistant
             hypertension because of other disease like renal disease or pheochromocytoma;
             included in other clinical trial in one month; pregnant or breast-feed or preparing
             for pregnancy female; combined with disease like stroke, coronary atherosclerotic
             heart disease, diabetes, chronic renal failure or mental disease.
