TITLE:
      Intrapleural Minocycline After Simple Aspiration for the Prevention of Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax
SUMMARY:
      The estimated recurrence rate of primary spontaneous pneumothorax is 23-50% after the first
      episode, and the optimal treatment remains unknown. In the recently published British
      Thoracic Society (BTS) guidelines, simple aspiration is recommended as first line treatment
      for all primary pneumothoraces requiring intervention. However, the 1 year recurrence rate
      of this procedure was as high as 25-30%, making it inappropriate as a standard of care.

      Intrapleural instillation of a chemical irritant (chemical pleurodesis) is an effective way
      to shorten the duration of air leaks and reduce the rates of recurrent spontaneous
      pneumothorax in surgical and non-surgical patients. Many chemical irritants (tetracycline,
      talc, and minocycline) have been used to decrease the rate of recurrence in spontaneous
      pneumothorax. Tetracycline, which was the most commonly used irritant, is no longer
      available. Talc insufflation of the pleural cavity is safe and effective for primary
      spontaneous pneumothorax. However, it should be applied either with surgical or medical
      thoracoscopy. Minocycline, a derivative of tetracycline, is as effective as tetracycline in
      inducing pleural fibrosis in rabbits. In the previous studies, we have shown that additional
      minocycline pleurodesis is a safe and convenient procedure to decrease the rates of
      ipsilateral recurrence after thoracoscopic treatment of primary spontaneous pneumothorax. In
      the present study, additional minocycline pleurodesis will be randomly administered in
      patients with first episode of primary spontaneous pneumothorax after simple aspiration to
      test if it can reduce the rate of recurrence.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background:

      Primary spontaneous pneumothorax most commonly occurs in young, tall, lean males (1, 2). The
      estimated recurrence rate is 23-50% after the first episode (3). Optimal treatment of
      patients presenting with a first episode of primary spontaneous pneumothorax remains
      unknown. In the recently published British Thoracic Society (BTS) guidelines (4), simple
      aspiration is recommended as first line treatment for all primary pneumothoraces requiring
      intervention. However, the 1 year recurrence rate of this procedure was as high as 26-30%
      (5), making it inappropriate as a standard of care.

      Intrapleural instillation of a chemical irritant (chemical pleurodesis) is an effective way
      to shorten the duration of air leaks and reduce the rates of recurrent spontaneous
      pneumothorax in surgical and non-surgical patients (6, 7). Light et al. has shown that
      intrapleural tetracycline is effective in reducing the rate of ipsilateral recurrence for
      patients with spontaneous pneumothorax (7). However, the recently published guidelines
      recommended that chemical pleurodesis should only be attempted if the patient is either
      unwilling or unable to undergo surgery because the rates of recurrence of pneumothoraces
      after surgical intervention either by thoracotomy or VATS, with or without surgical
      pleurodesis, is far less than after chemical pleurodesis (4, 8). As a result, chemical
      pleurodesis has rarely been used in primary spontaneous pneumothorax, and the effect of
      additional chemical pleurodesis after simple aspiration in preventing recurrence of
      pneumothoraces has never been evaluated.

      Tetracycline, which was the most commonly used irritant, is no longer available.
      Minocycline, a derivative of tetracycline, is as effective as tetracycline in inducing
      pleural fibrosis in rabbits (9). In the previous studies, we have shown that additional
      minocycline pleurodesis is a safe and convenient procedure that associates with lower rates
      of prolonged air leaks and ipsilateral recurrence after thoracoscopic treatment of primary
      spontaneous pneumothorax (10, 11).

      In the present study, additional minocycline pleurodesis will be randomly administered in
      patients with first episode of primary spontaneous pneumothorax after simple aspiration to
      test if it can reduce the rate of recurrence. This study will comply with the protocol, GCP
      and applicable requirement of the Institutional Review Boards (IRB) of the NTUH and Far
      Eastern Memorial Hospital.

      Patients and Methods:

      Study design This study is a prospective, randomized, controlled trial to evaluate if
      additional minocycline pleurodesis after simple aspiration will be effective in preventing
      recurrence of primary spontaneous pneumothorax.

      Primary Objective The primary end point is to compare the rates of ipsilateral recurrence
      between the minocycline and observation groups after simple aspiration of the pneumothorax.

      Secondary Objectives

        1. Safety profile of minocycline pleurodesis

        2. Early results, including immediate success rates, one-week success rates, complication
           rates, rates of hospitalization, duration of hospitalization, and the degrees of chest
           pain.

        3. Long-term effects of minocycline pleurodesis, including degrees of residual chest pain
           and pulmonary function test.

      Eligibility criteria

      Patients must meet ALL of the inclusion criteria for the entry of this study:

        1. Male or female.

        2. Age between 15 and 40 years old.

        3. First episode of spontaneous pneumothorax.

        4. Symptomatic (dyspnea or chest pain) or the rim of air is > 2cm on CXR requiring simple
           aspiration

        5. Complete or nearly complete and persistent lung expansion immediately following manual
           aspiration

        6. Organ Function Requirements:

             1. Adequate hematological function (Hb > 10 g/dl, ANC > 1.5 x 109/L, platelets > 100
                x 109/L)

             2. Normal renal and hepatic functions: serum creatinine < 1 x ULN, SGPT and SGOT< 2.5
                x ULN, alkaline phosphatase < 5 x ULN

        7. Written inform consent

      The exclusion criteria are:

        1. With underlying pulmonary disease (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
           bronchiectasis, etc)

        2. With hemothorax or tension pneumothorax requiring chest tube insertion or operation

        3. A history of previous pneumothorax

        4. A history of previous ipsilateral thoracic operation

        5. Allergy to tetracycline or minocycline

        6. Pregnant or lactating patients.

        7. Other serious concomitant illness or medical conditions:

             1. Congestive heart failure or unstable angina pectoris.

             2. History of myocardial infarction within 1 year prior to the study entry.

             3. Uncontrolled hypertension or arrhythmia.

             4. History of significant neurologic or psychiatric disorders, including dementia or
                seizure.

             5. Active infection requiring i.v. antibiotics. Subjects who are unwilling to undergo
                randomization, treatment, or follow-up procedures will be removed from the study.
                Subjects can also withdraw from the trial at any time point by their will.

      Randomization:

      Patients will be randomized at each center with separate random number lists into one of the
      two treatment groups using a computer-generated table numerically corresponding with the
      treatment group. The trial treatment randomization codes will be maintained until the end of
      the study and will be broken by investigators who were blind to the randomization procedure.

      Manual aspiration Manual aspiration will be performed as follows: patients were seated in
      semi-supine position. After skin disinfection and field preparation, a small-caliber
      pig-tail catheter (6-10 French) will be introduced after local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine
      in the second intercostal space, at the midclavicular line. After the catheter enters the
      pleural space, the catheter will be fixed to the skin using sterile adhesive tape and
      connected via a three-way valve to a 50-ml syringe. Air will be manually aspirated, until a
      resistance was felt and air was no longer aspirated. Thereafter, a chest X-ray will be
      performed with the catheter in place.

      Minocycline pleurodesis In the minocycline group, 30 mL of 1% lidocaine hydrochloride
      (300mg) followed by a solution of 30 mL of normal saline containing 300 mg of minocycline
      (Mirosin®, Taiwan Panbiotic Laboratories, Kaohsiung, Taiwan) will be instilled into the
      pleural cavity through the pig-tail catheter or chest tube. In the observation group,
      nothing will be administered. Administration of other chemical pleurodesis agents is
      prohibited during the study period. Intramuscular meperidine hydrochloride (Demerol®,
      50mg/ampule) will be administered every 4 to 6 hours according to the patient's request if
      the pain became intolerable, could not be relieved by oral analgesics, and visual analogue
      scale was greater than 7. Chest radiography will be performed immediate postoperatively or
      the next morning. VAS will be evaluated immediately 6 hours later after minocycline
      administration.

      Study Endpoints:

      The primary end point will be rate of ipsilateral recurrence after the procedure. Secondary
      end points include safety, early results, and long-term effects of minocycline pleurodesis.

      Immediate success rates: defined as complete or nearly complete and persistent lung
      expansion immediately following manual aspiration. Immediate success for chest tube drainage
      is defined as complete lung expansion, absence of air leakage, and chest drain removal
      within 24 hours after catheter placement.

      One weeks success rates are defined as complete and persistent lung expansion at one weeks
      after the first attempt of aspiration or tube insertion.

      One-year success: absence of recurrent pneumothorax during a 1-year follow-up period. .

      Safety assessments:

      Safety assessments will consist of monitoring and recording all toxicity, adverse events,
      safety laboratory examination, vital signs, physical examination. The adverse events which
      are not reported will be graded as mild, moderate, severe, and life-threatening. Adverse
      event will be tabulated and the incidence rates will be calculated.

      Sample size estimation:

      A sample size of 300 patients (150 in each group) will be needed to reach clinical
      significance (at the .05 level with a power of 0.9) if minocycline reduced the recurrence
      rate from 30% to 15% and the drop out rate is 10%. A planned interim analysis will be
      conducted after enrollment of 150 patients with at least 12 months of follow-up. Statistical
      analysis will be performed on an intent-to-treat basis rather than in an actual treatment
      basis.

      Follow-up After discharge from the hospital, patients will be followed at the outpatient
      clinics at 1 week, 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months where chest radiography will be
      performed. Follow-ups will then be conducted every 6 months by a registered nurse who is
      blinded to the group allocation by telephone conversation, according to a standard
      questionnaire that included when the patient returns to work or school, whether a recurrence
      occurred, when it happened, and how it is treated. Residual postoperative chest pain will be
      evaluated on a pain score from 0 to 5, where 0 is pain free; 1 is occasional discomfort; 2
      is occasional use of analgesics; 3 is using nonopiate analgesics; 4 is regular pain using
      opiates; 5 is severe and intractable pain. All patients will be followed for at least 12
      months. Patients can come back to the clinic or visit emergency department whenever they
      have chest pain, dyspnea, or any signs related to the recurrence of pneumothorax.

      Pulmonary function analysis Pulmonary function tests will be performed for patients able to
      attend a hospital outpatient appointment at least 6 months after surgery. Forced vital
      capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1.0) will be measured using a
      spirometer of Microspiro HI-298 (Chest Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) with the patients seated.
      A minimum of three acceptable forced expiratory maneuvers will be performed and the best one
      will be selected for analysis.

      Data collection and statistical analysis The clinical data, duration of chest drainage,
      length of hospital stay, complications, requested doses of meperidine, and data of VAS will
      be collected. Continuous variables such as age or weight will be expressed as the mean +
      standard deviation and analyzed by the two sample t-test. Categorical variables such as
      gender or smoking status will be presented by frequency (%) and analyzed by the Fisher's
      exact test. Intensity of postoperative pain measured by VAS (from 0 to 10) were summarized
      by mean (95 percent confidence interval) and compared by Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Scores of
      residual chest pain will be analyzed by the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Freedom from recurrence
      will be analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method, and comparisons will be made by the log-rank
      test.

      Reference:

        1. Gobbel WG Jr, Rhea WG, Nelson IA, Daniel RA Jr. Spontaneous pneumothorax. J Thorac
           Cardiovasc Surg 1963;46:331-345.

        2. Lichter J, Gwynne JF. Spontaneous pneumothorax in young subjects. Thorax
           1971;25:409-417.

        3. Light RW. Management of spontaneous pneumothorax. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;148:245-258.

        4. Henry M, Arnold T, Harvey J; Pleural Diseases Group, Standards of Care Committee,
           British Thoracic Society. BTS guidelines for the management of spontaneous
           pneumothorax. Thorax 2003;58(Supple 2):39-52.

        5. Noppen M, AJRCCM, 2003

        6. Hatta T, Tsubota N, Yoshimura M, Yanagawa M. Intrapleural minocycline for postoperative
           air leakage and control of malignant pleural effusion. Kyobu Geka 1990;43:283-286.

        7. Light RW, O'Hara VS, Moritz TE, McElhinney AJ, Butz R, Haakenson CM, Read RC, Sassoon
           CS, Eastridge CE, Berger R, et al. Intrapleural tetracycline for the prevention of
           recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax. JAMA 1990;264:2224-2230.

        8. Baumann MH, Strange C, Heffner JE, Light R, Kirby TJ, Klein J, Luketich JD, Panacek EA,
           Sahn SA; AACP Pneumothorax Consensus Group. Management of spontaneous pneumothorax: an
           American College of Chest Physicians Delphi consensus statement. Chest
           2001;119:590-602.

        9. Light RW, Wang NS, Sassoon CSH, Gruer SE, Vargas FS. Comparison of the effectiveness of
           tetracycline and minocycline as pleural sclerosing agents in rabbits. Chest
           1994;106:577-582.

       10. Chen JS, Hsu HH, Kuo SW, Tsai PR, Chen RJ, Lee JM, Lee YC: Effects of additional
           minocycline pleurodesis after thoracoscopic procedures for primary spontaneous
           pneumothorax. Chest 2004;125:50-55.

       11. Chen JS, Hsu HH, Chen RJ, Kuo SW, Huang PM, Tsai PR , Lee JM, Lee YC: Additional
           minocycline pleurodesis after thoracoscopic surgery for primary spontaneous
           pneumothorax. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;173: 548-554.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Male or female.

          2. Age between 15 and 40 years old.

          3. First episode of spontaneous pneumothorax.

          4. Symptomatic (dyspnea or chest pain) or the rim of air is > 2cm on CXR requiring
             simple aspiration

          5. Complete or nearly complete and persistent lung expansion immediately following
             manual aspiration

          6. Organ Function Requirements:

               -  Adequate hematological function (Hb > 10 g/dl, ANC > 1.5 x 109/L, platelets >
                  100 x 109/L)

               -  Normal renal and hepatic functions: serum creatinine < 1 x ULN, SGPT and SGOT<
                  2.5 x ULN, alkaline phosphatase < 5 x ULN

          7. Written inform consent

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. With underlying pulmonary disease (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
             bronchiectasis, etc)

          2. With hemothorax or tension pneumothorax requiring chest tube insertion or operation

          3. A history of previous pneumothorax

          4. A history of previous ipsilateral thoracic operation

          5. Allergy to tetracycline or minocycline

          6. Pregnant or lactating patients.

          7. Other serious concomitant illness or medical conditions:

               -  Congestive heart failure or unstable angina pectoris.

               -  History of myocardial infarction within 1 year prior to the study entry.

               -  Uncontrolled hypertension or arrhythmia.

               -  History of significant neurologic or psychiatric disorders, including dementia
                  or seizure.

               -  Active infection requiring i.v. antibiotics.
