TITLE:
      1-Octanol to Treat Essential Tremor
SUMMARY:
      This study will evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the food additive 1-octanol for
      treating essential tremor. This disorder, which is an involuntary shaking, usually of the
      hands, has no satisfactory treatment. It affects more than one of every 100 people in the
      general population, with the figure climbing to nearly 4 in every hundred among people over
      40 years old. In animal studies, 1-octanol reduced chemically induced tremors in rats. This
      study will test the effects of the accepted daily intake of 1-octanol (1 milligram per
      kilogram of body weight) on essential tremor in humans.

      Patients with essential tremor 21 years old and older who wish to enroll in this study will
      undergo eligibility screening with a medical history and physical examination that includes
      tests for thyroid, liver and kidney problems. Participants will be randomly assigned to
      receive either 1-octanol or a placebo (an inactive substance). Patients in both groups will
      have an intravenous catheter (a thin, plastic tube) placed in an arm vein for collecting
      blood samples during the study. Those in the 1-octanol group will be given a 1-octanol
      capsule; the placebo group will receive a look-alike capsule containing no active
      ingredient. Neither the patient nor the doctor will know which patients are taking 1-octanol
      or placebo until the end of the study.

      Tremors will be measured once before the catheter is placed, every 15 minutes during the
      first 2 hours after taking the capsule, twice during the third hour (30 minutes apart), and
      once again after 5 hours. The tremors are measured using procedures called accelerometry and
      surface electromyography. For these procedures, electrodes are taped to the skin; needles
      are not used. Blood samples will be collected once before taking the capsule, every 15
      minutes for the first hour and a half after taking the capsule and again at 2 hours, 4 hours
      and 5 hours after taking the capsule. Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory
      rate) will be measured every 15 minutes during the first 2 hours of taking the capsule,
      every 30 minutes during the third hour, and again at 4 hours and 5 hours.

      Participants will stay in the hospital overnight for observation and return after 3 days for
      a follow-up physical examination, including a blood test.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Essential tremor (ET) is the most common movement disorder; however, there is currently no
      satisfactory drug treatment. The neural mechanisms underlying ET remain unknown. One of the
      prevalent hypotheses is that ET is a result of a defective mechanism that normally dampens
      the natural oscillations of inferior olive (IO) neurons whose intrinsic oscillatory activity
      is attributed to the presence of low threshold calcium channels (LTCC). 1-Octanol is known
      to inhibit LTCC of olivary neurons and was found to reduce the tremor induced in rats with
      harmaline, an alkaloid known to hyperpolarize IO neurons increasing their tendency to fire
      rhythmically at rest. The aim of this study is to assess the effects of 1-octanol on ET in
      humans. This study is designed as a double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-dose trial in
      untreated patients with ET. Electromyography (EMG) and acclerometry are used to assess
      tremor before and after 1-octanol administration. The accepted daily intake (ADI) of
      1-octanol (1 mg/kg/d) as a food additive will be given as a single dose. Toxicity from
      octanol will be monitored clinically and by liver function and electrolyte measurements.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients with essential tremor affecting the upper limbs who are 21 years of age or older.

        Patients who are not taking medications for essential tremor or any other medical
        condition for at least 2 weeks.

        Patients who have not consumed alcohol or cold medications containing alcohol for at least
        24 hours prior to the day of the study.

        Women must not be pregnant or lactating. Women of childbearing age must use birth control
        while participating in this study.

        Patients must not have any neurological disease other than tremor (e.g., Parkinson's
        disease).

        Patients must not have evidence of thyroid, liver, kidney or chronic lung disease.
