TITLE:
      Predicting Patients' Response to Spinal Manipulation
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to compare the clinical effectiveness of two types of
      chiropractic spinal manipulation to conservative medical care for patients at least 55 years
      old with sub-acute or chronic LBP.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Despite the high prevalence of LBP and the associated economic costs, disability, and lost
      productivity, and despite the development of several treatment guidelines, one of which
      recommends chiropractic spinal manipulation for some subgroups of patients with back pain,
      the management of LBP remains controversial and highly variable across professions and
      geographic regions. Although one recent publication describes the design of chiropractic and
      exercise for seniors with low back or neck pain, no published studies, to our knowledge,
      have assessed the effectiveness of chiropractic manipulation compared to medical care for
      older adults with sub-acute or chronic low back pain.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age 21 to 55

          -  Idiopathic mechanical low back pain (LBP) matching classification 1-4 of the Quebec
             Task Force.

          -  LBP classified as subacute (onset 4-12 weeks previous) or chronic (onset more than 12
             weeks previous), with the current episode occurring at least four weeks prior to the
             date of contact with the clinic: In order to exclude the greatest proportion of LBP
             patients that have a favorable natural history of improvement.

          -  Written Informed Consent

          -  A minimum baseline score on the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMQ) of 6
             points.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  LBP from other somatic tissues as determined by history, examination, and course
             (e.g. pain referred from visceral conditions).

          -  LBP diagnosis not meeting Classifications 1 through 4 of the Quebec Task Force,
             especially the following: low back pain associated with frank radiculopathy defined
             as typical shooting leg pain; positive straight leg-raising test; an altered lower
             extremity reflex; a dermatomal sensory deficit; at least one of the following:
             progressive unilateral muscle weakness or motor loss, or symptoms of cauda equina
             compression; and CT or MRI evidence of related anatomical pathology (e.g. abnormal
             disc, stenosis).

          -  Co-morbid pathology or poor health conditions in patients; Co-morbid conditions and
             general poor health significantly complicate the prognosis of LBP, and inject a
             variety of uncontrollable factors in case-management, not to mention experimental
             analysis and interpretation. Patients who have case histories and physical
             examination findings indicating other that average good health will be excluded from
             the study.

          -  Bone and joint pathology contraindicating patient for SM of the lumbar spine and
             pelvis: Patients with spinal fractures, tumors, infections, arthropathies, and
             significant osteoporosis will be referred to appropriate health care.

          -  Other contraindications for SM of the lumbar spine and pelvis (e.g. bleeding
             disorders or anticoagulant therapy, extreme obesity).

          -  Retention of legal advice related to this or a previous LBP episode: Patients with
             occupational or personal injuries will not be automatically excluded from the study
             unless they answer yes to a specific question about the retention of legal advice
             with respect to their LBP episode at the baseline interview.

          -  Pregnancy: Pregnancy is a contraindication for exposing a patient to ionizing
             radiation and is a confounding factor in the usual course of LBP.

          -  Inability to read or verbally comprehend English.

          -  Clear evidence of narcotic or other drug abuse as determined by history and
             examination: injects significant confounding factors with respect to internal
             validity and feasibility.

          -  Major clinical depression: Patients with scores greater than 17 on the Beck
             Depression Inventory will be excluded from the study. Patients with evidence of other
             psychiatric disorders as determined by history and exam will also be excluded.

          -  Use of manipulative care for any reason within the past 3 months as determined by
             history: to exclude the possibility of carryover effects.

          -  Unwillingness to postpone use of all other types of manual treatment for LBP except
             those provided in the study (including chiropractic and osteopathic SM, physical
             therapy, and massage) for the duration of the study period: to eliminate confounding
             effects.
