TITLE:
      Impact of Cholinesterase Inhibitors on Driving Ability in Healthy Older Adults
SUMMARY:
      The goal of the study is to assess the role of cholinesterase inhibitors in affecting the
      driving ability of cognitively intact seniors using driving simulators. We hypothesize that
      the use of a cholinesterase inhibitor for two weeks will be associated with improvement in
      safe driving behavior on a simulated driving task.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, and while it is known that AD
      poses substantial risks of motor vehicle collisions, many people in the earliest stages of
      AD continue to drive. Memory problems themselves are poor predictors of who is actually
      unsafe on the road, and various medications that are used to treat people with AD may impact
      on their driving abilities. Donepezil is a drug used to treat the memory problems associated
      with AD. While previous studies have shown that it slows the decline of activities of daily
      living (eg. shopping, banking, dressing) and may improve the ability of younger pilots to
      perform on computerized flight simulators, no studies have examined the impact of donepezil
      on driving abilities in older adults.

      The present investigation is a pilot study aiming to determine if donepezil helps healthy
      older drivers perform on driving simulators. Two Canadian academic centers have different
      driving simulators - one in Toronto and one in Thunder Bay. At each of these centers, ten
      healthy men aged 65 to 75 will be randomly assigned to receive either donepezil 5mg/day or
      identical placebo for two weeks.

      Using the driving simulator, we will assess various aspects of driving ability. These
      measures of driving performance will be compared between those who received the drug and
      those who received the placebo.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  valid Ontario driver's license

          -  active driver (greater than or equal to three times per week)

          -  written, informed consent

          -  lives in Toronto/Thunder Bay

          -  healthy

          -  Male between 65-75 years old

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  cognitive impairment

          -  psychiatric history

          -  sleep disorder history

          -  substance abuse

          -  neurological history

          -  medical illness

          -  ophthalmological disease

          -  psychoactive medications

          -  contra-indications to Donepezil

          -  experience car/motion sickness
