TITLE:
      HAL-RAR Versus Hemorrhoidectomy in the Treatment of Grade III-IV Hemorrhoids. Prospective, Randomized Trial
SUMMARY:
      HYPOTHESIS

        1. HAL- RAR causes a lower immediate postoperative pain compared with erxcision
           hemorrhoidectomy.

        2. HAL - RAR achieves similar immediate and long term results compared to the excision
           hemorrhoidectomy in the control of hemorrhoidal symptoms.

        3. The complication rate of HAL- RAR is low and similar to excision hemorrhoidectomy.

      OBJECTIVES

        1. Compare postoperative pain of both techniques.

        2. Assess the short and long-term control of hemorrhoidal symptoms by HAL- RAR technique,
           and compare the results with those of the excision hemorrhoidectomy.

        3. Evaluate and compare the rate of complications of both techniques.

        4. Assess the quality of life of patients before and after treatment.

      MATERIAL AND METHODS

      The trial was subjected to evaluation and accepted by the Ethics Committee of the Fundació
      Unió Catalana d'Hospitals (Catalonian Union of Hospitals Foundation).

      All patients with grade III and IV hemorrhoids that are eligible for surgical treatment with
      both methods who agree to participate in the study, will be included in the prospective
      randomized trial. All patients will be required to sign the specific informed consent.

      Patients who are suitable for treatment with both techniques will be randomly assigned to
      the surgical technique.

      Inclusion criteria:

      1. Patients with symptomatic grade III or IV hemorrhoids (bleeding, pain, itching, soiling
      or prolapse) that are eligible for surgical treatment with both methods.

      Exclusion criteria:

        1. Associated recto-anal pathology such as acute thrombosed hemorrhoid, anal fissure,
           perianal fistula, perianal abscess, rectal prolapse, fecal incontinence or anal
           stenosis.

        2. Prior anorectal surgery .

        3. Systemic pathology that could alter the outcome of the surgery as coagulopathies,
           chronic pain with continued consumption of analgesics.

        4. Age younger than 18 or older than 80 years, socio-pathology or inability to understand
           the study objectives.

      All surgeries are performed on an outpatient basis under regional anesthesia and sedation
      for the same team of three surgeons. Preoperative preparation consists of a cleansing enema
      and no prophylactic antibiotics will be administered.

      Both techniques will be performed in "Jack -Knife" position. The open hemorrhoidectomy may
      include one to three anal cushions and made according to the Milligan-Morgan technique, with
      resection of the anal cushion and the external hemorrhoidal epidermal component using
      electrocautery and ligation of the hemorroidal base with absorbable suture. Once completed
      hemorrhoidectomy a perianal block is performed with bupivacaine/epinephrine.

      Hemorrhoidal artery ligation and rectoanal repair will be performed with the AMI minimally
      invasive surgery device HAL/RAR, and consist in the ligation of the terminal branches of the
      superior rectal artery with 2-0 absorbable polyglycolic acid suture after identifying the
      blood flow approximately 3 cm above the dentate line by using Doppler guidance.
      Subsequently, a running suture was added from the suture point to 5 mm above the dentate
      line to lift the prolapsing hemorroid. Other procedures will not be associated, if
      necessary, the patient will be excluded from the study .

      The patient will be discharged if adequate pain control, oral tolerance and spontaneous
      diuresis is achieved, and after examination by the surgeon in order to discard immediate
      complications. The ambulatory treatment consists of an osmotic laxative (magnesium hydroxide
      ), oral analgesia with paracetamol/tramadol ( 325mg/37.5mg ) every 6 hours and Dexketoprofen
      (25 mg) every 8 hours, metamizol (575 mg) may be associated every 8 hours if pain. In case
      of persistent pain, the patient will be examinated in emergency room.

      EVALUATION OF RESULTS A power analysis was performed to assess the study sample size.
      Choosing a power of 0.8 and a confidence interval of 95% α-error of 0.05, we calculated that
      26 patients were needed in each arm. We increased this number up to 30 to increase
      reliability of the study.

      All patients will be evaluated with a validated questionnaire of 36 questions on quality of
      life ( SF-36 ) and specific questions about specific symptoms of hemorrhoidal disease (pain,
      itching , bleeding, soiling and hemorrhoidal prolapse reduction ). The questionnaire will be
      answered before the intervention, after six and twelve months of follow up.

      All patients will complete a diary testing global postoperative pain every day, measured on
      a numerical scale from 0 to 10 during the first 15 days.

      The patients will be assessed on the day of discharge and at 7, 14, and 30 postoperative
      days. The patients will be evaluated at 6, 12 and 24 postoperative months in the outpatient
      clinic.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The classic surgical treatment of hemorrhoidal disease is the excisional hemorrhoidectomy,
      that consist in the surgical removal of one or more hemorrhoidal cushion, it is considered a
      safe, radical and definitive treatment; however, it is not exempt of complications and the
      postoperative pain is considerable. During the last two decades the concept of treatment has
      evolved to control hemorrhoidal symptoms with less invasive techniques, such as hemorrhoidal
      bands, arterial ligation Doppler guided hemorrhoidal and more recently, the association of
      anorectal repair or mucopexia for treating hemorrhoidal mucosal prolapse .

      The results of the doppler guided transanal dearterialization and rectoanal repair (HAL-RAR)
      in the treatment of hemorrhoidal disease, show good control of symptoms, less postoperative
      pain and low rates of complications in the treatment of grade II, III and IV hemorrhoids.1
      -10

      The advantages of the HAL- RAR could be more limited in advanced hemorrhoidal disease (stage
      IV), in this stage have been reported a recurrence rate of up to 38 % 4.

      The studies with more patients treated with HAL- RAR are those of Faucheron et al3 (100
      patients) and Roka et al6 (77 patients). These studies reported good results in the
      treatment of grade IV hemorrhoids with a high rate of outpatient treatment, good control of
      symptoms (89 %) and a low rate of complications. Te complications presented 9% in the
      immediate postoperative period and 4% in the long term, all were treated conservatively.

      Currently there are few prospective randomized studies that demonstrate the results of HAL-
      RAR compared with open hemorrhoidectomy, the long-term results remain to be demonstrated.

      In the literature there are two prospective randomized studies comparing the HAL- RAR with
      excision hemorrhoidectomy1 -2. In both studies, good results were observed with these
      techniques with regard to symptom control; postoperative pain and long-term results were
      similar with both techniques.

      The publication of more randomized prospective studies to allow proper evaluation of the
      results in patients who underwent HAL- RAR is required.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with symptomatic grade III or IV hemorrhoids (bleeding, pain, itching,
             soiling or prolapse) that are elegible for surgical treatment with both methods.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Associated recto-anal pathology such as acute thrombosed hemorrhoid, anal fissure,
             perianal fistula, perianal abscess, rectal prolapse, fecal incontinence or anal
             stenosis.

          -  Prior anorectal surgery .

          -  Systemic pathology that could alter the outcome of the surgery as coagulopathies,
             chronic pain with continued consumption of analgesics.

          -  Age younger than 18 or older than 80 years, socio-pathology or inability to
             understand the study objectives
