TITLE:
      Role of Dairy Products in Weight Maintenance
SUMMARY:
      The goal of the current study is to determine the role of dairy in similarly preventing
      weight and fat re-gain in obese adults who have successfully completed a weight loss diet
      program.240 obese subjects will undergo a meal-replacement-based weight loss plan designed
      to produce a 10 kg weight loss in 8-12 weeks. Upon achieving the weight loss goal, subjects
      will be randomly assigned to either a low-dairy or high-dairy eucaloric weight maintenance
      diet for two years. Macronutrient distribution will be maintained constant and set at
      approximately the U.S. average. Primary outcomes include changes in body weight, body fat
      and anatomical distribution of fat (via dual x-ray absorptiometry) and resting metabolic
      rate and substrate oxidation (via respiratory calorimetry); Secondary outcomes include blood
      pressure, circulating glucose, insulin, lipids and calcitrophic hormones. on prevention of
      weight regain in humans has not yet been assessed in clinical trials.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Dietary calcium plays a pivotal role in the regulation of energy metabolism, as we have
      found high calcium diets to attenuate adipocyte lipid accretion and weight gain during
      periods of over-consumption of an energy-dense diet and to increase lipolysis and preserve
      thermogenesis during caloric restriction, thereby markedly accelerating weight loss. Our
      studies of the agouti gene demonstrate a key role for intracellular Ca2+ in regulating
      adipocyte lipid metabolism and triglyceride storage, with increased intracellular Ca2+
      resulting in stimulation of lipogenic gene expression and lipogenesis and suppression of
      lipolysis, resulting in adipocyte lipid filling and increased adiposity. Moreover, the
      increased calcitriol produced in response to low calcium diets stimulates adipocyte Ca2+
      influx and, consequently, promotes adiposity, while higher calcium diets inhibit
      lipogenesis, promote lipolysis, lipid oxidation and thermogenesis and inhibit diet-induced
      obesity in mice. Notably, dairy sources of calcium exert markedly greater effects in
      attenuating weight and fat gain and accelerating fat loss. This augmented effect of dairy
      products versus supplemental calcium is likely due to additional bioactive compounds in
      dairy which act synergistically with calcium to attenuate adiposity. These concepts are
      confirmed by both epidemiological and clinical data which demonstrates that increasing
      dietary calcium results in significant reductions in adipose tissue mass in obese humans in
      the absence of caloric restriction and markedly accelerates the weight and body fat loss
      secondary to caloric restriction, while dairy products exert markedly greater (nearly
      two-fold compared to calcium supplements) effects. These data indicate an important role for
      dairy products in both the prevention and treatment of obesity. However, weight maintenance
      following successful weight loss (i.e. prevention of regain) is at least as important as
      strategies to initially achieve weight loss, as most individuals who successfully lose
      weight are not successful in maintaining this weight loss. We have recently demonstrated
      that ad libitum re-feeding of dairy-rich following weight loss in mice on an energy
      restricted mice prevented the suppression of adipose tissue lipolysis and fat oxidation that
      otherwise accompanies such re-feeding and markedly upregulated skeletal muscle fat
      oxidation. Consequently, although animals re-fed low calcium diets rapidly regained all of
      the weight and fat that had been lost, animals fed high calcium diets exhibited a shift in
      energy partitioning and a 50-85% reduction in weight and fat gain; moreover, dairy exerted
      markedly greater effects than supplemental calcium on weight and fat regain. However, the
      effect of dairy on prevention of weight regain in humans has not yet been assessed in
      clinical trials. Accordingly, the goal of the current study is to determine the role of
      dairy in similarly preventing weight and fat re-gain in obese adults who have successfully
      completed a weight loss diet program.

      340 obese subjects will undergo a meal-replacement-based weight loss plan designed to
      produce a 10 kg weight loss in 8-12 weeks. Upon achieving the weight loss goal, subjects
      will be randomly assigned to either a low-dairy or high-dairy eucaloric weight maintenance
      diet for two years. Macronutrient distribution will be maintained constant and set at
      approximately the U.S. average. Primary outcomes include changes in body weight, body fat
      and anatomical distribution of fat (via dual x-ray absorptiometry) and resting metabolic
      rate and substrate oxidation (via respiratory calorimetry); Secondary outcomes include blood
      pressure, circulating glucose, insulin, lipids and calcitrophic hormones.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Body mass index (BMI) 30-39.9 kg/m2

          -  Age 25-50 years

          -  No more than 3 kg weight loss during past three months

          -  Negative pregnancy test at entry; women of childbearing potential may be enrolled if
             they have had a tubal ligation or use one of the following means of contraception:
             condom, diaphragm, oral or implanted contraceptives, or intrauterine device. Women in
             exclusive relationships with male partners who have had a successful vasectomy will
             not be required to use any additional means of birth control.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  BMI < 30 or >40

          -  Type II diabetes requiring the use of any oral antidiabetic agent and/or insulin
             (because of confounding effects on body weight regulation)

          -  Adverse response to study foods (lactose intolerance, dairy intolerance, dairy
             allergy); this will be determined by self-report.

          -  History or presence of significant metabolic disease which could impact on the
             results of the study (i.e. endocrine, hepatic, renal disease)

          -  History of eating disorder

          -  Presence of active gastrointestinal disorders such as malabsorption syndromes

          -  Pregnancy or lactation

          -  Use of obesity pharmacotherapeutic agents within the last 6 months

          -  Use of over-the-counter anti-obesity agents (e.g. those containing
             phenylpropanalamine, ephedrine and/or caffeine) within the last 6 months

          -  Recent (past 12 weeks) use of tobacco

          -  Recent (current or past 12 weeks) use of any psychotropic medication

          -  Recent (past four weeks) initiation of an exercise program

          -  Recent (past twelve weeks) initiation of hormone replacement therapy or change in HRT
             regimen

          -  Recent (past twelve weeks) initiation of hormonal birth control or change in hormonal
             birth control regimen
