TITLE:
      Comparison of Intravenous Injection of Calcium Antagonist and Beta-blockade on Endothelial Shear Stress of Coronary Artery
SUMMARY:
      Both calcium channel antagonist and beta-blocker have cardioprotective effect. Endothelial
      shear stress is predictive factor of clinical outcomes in patients with obstructive
      stenosis.

      The present study aims at comparing the re-distribution of shear stress and blood velocity
      during whole cardiac cycle after trans-coronary injection of Nicardipine and esmolol.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Blood flow-induced endothelial shear stress has strong effect on endothelial function and
      development or progression of plaque formation. It is extensively accepted that low and/or
      oscillating shear stress causes endothelial dysfunction and is one of crucial factors in
      localizing early atherosclerosis .In contrary, normal and high shear stress is atheroma
      protective and is involved in compensatory remodeling . Most studies reported that the
      endothelial shear stress distribution in often idealized geometrical models of human
      coronary arteries was the subject of numerous investigations , and in these studies it was
      shown that the geometry of coronary arteries is the main determinant of the observed shear
      stress distribution. Generally, downstream of a plaque, low shear stress can be expected,
      Several cardiovascular active drugs have been shown to be cardio-protective for patients
      with obstructive coronary disease. Of these drugs, calcium channel blocker is one of most
      prescribed in everyday clinical practice. Ninomiya et al. reported calcium channel blocker
      was associated with increased coronary diameter and blood fluid with dose-dependent pattern
      in patients with normal or mild stenotic coronary artery. However, no reports on the dynamic
      change of endothelial shear stress after calcium channel blocker in -vitron were published
      so far. As a result, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of intra-venous
      injection of Nicardipine, one calcium channel blocker with shorter half-time, on the
      re-distribution of endothelial shear stress in patients with acute coronary syndrome and
      mild stenotic (<50%) coronary artery disease.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Diagnosis of unstable angina and non-Q wave myocardial infarction

          -  Age 18-75 yr.

          -  Diameter stenosis of coronary artery<70% diameter stenosis by visual estimation

          -  Blood pressure >110/70 mmHg

          -  Heart rate 60-~100 bpm, No cardiac arrhythmias

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  St-elevation myocardial infarction

          -  Lower blood pressure(<100/70mmHg)

          -  Heart rate <60 or >100 bpm, The presence of cardiac arrhythmias

          -  Allergy to study drugs

          -  Women in pregnancy

          -  Liver dysfunction

          -  Creatinine >2.5mg/dl

          -  Bleeding stroke within 6 months

          -  Left ventricular ejection fraction<30% before maximal medication
