TITLE:
      Effects of Intensive Robot-assisted Therapy in Patients With Subacute Stroke
SUMMARY:
      Robot-assisted training (RT) devices developed to date have a significant impact on stroke
      rehabilitation. Several research groups have developed the robotic devices and examined
      their efficacy on improving upper limb function after stroke. All these robotic devices have
      been applied in stroke rehabilitation and their efficacy are evaluated, but the scientific
      evidence for the mechanisms of RT-induced recovery, the optimal treatment intensity, and the
      impact on physiological responses is still lacking.

      This trial is to examine (1) the immediate effects of treatment intensity in RT on
      sensorimotor impairments and functional performance in patients with subacute stroke; (2)
      the long-term benefits of treatment intensity in RT by conducting a 6-month follow up
      evaluation; and (3) the effects of RT on cortical/movement reorganization as well as on the
      physiological markers of inflammation, oxidative stress, and erythrocyte deformability.
      These overall findings will help better understanding of the efficacy of RT on functional
      outcomes, brain and movement reorganization, and physiological markers.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Subacute stroke participants will be recruited from the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
      then were randomly assigned to 1 of the 3 groups: RT with higher-intensity group, RT with
      lower-intensity group, and conventional intervention group. Assessments on sensorimotor
      impairments (Fugl Mayer Assessment, Motor Status Scale, Modified Ashworth Scale, Myoton,
      Muscle Metabolism, Box and Block Test, and Revised Nottingham Sensory assessment) and
      functional performance (Functional Independence Measure, Motor Activity Log, ABILHAND
      Questionnaire, Adelaide Activities Profile, EQ-5D-5L, and accelerometer) take about 40
      minutes to complete. Evaluation of brain reorganization using functional magnetic resonance
      image and movement patterns by kinematic analysis take about 1 hour for each examination.
      Blood samples of the patients (12 ml.) will be collected to examine the physiological
      markers (ie, inflammation-related markers, oxidative stress markers, and erythrocyte
      deformability) before and after intervention. Total 24 ml blood will be collected in this
      study. Except for the blood taking, all the examinations are non-invasive.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  first episode of unilateral stroke

          -  time since stroke less than 3 months, i.e., acute or subacute stage

          -  initial motor part of upper limb of FMA score ranging from 10 to 40, indicating
             severe to moderate movement impairment

          -  no serious cognitive impairment (i.e., Mini Mental State Exam score > 23)

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  pregnant or breastfeeding women

          -  aphasia that might interfere with understanding instructions

          -  major health problems or poor physical conditions that might limit participation

          -  currently participation in any other research. Potential participants will be also
             excluded if they have any contraindication to fMRI scanning including claustrophobia,
             seizures, the presence of pacemaker, mental elements (e.g., steel nails) inside the
             body or in the eyes, and excessive obesity.
