TITLE:
      Sleep Apnea in Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes)
SUMMARY:
      This study will assess the effects of weight loss on sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) in 120
      obese, type 2 diabetics with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) from four Look AHEAD sites.
      Changes in SDB will be compared between subjects randomized to weight loss (Lifestyle
      Intervention Group) versus non-weight loss (Diabetes Education and Support Group) conditions
      within the context of the Look AHEAD Study. Weight loss is frequently recommended for obese
      patients with OSA, but the empirical foundation for this recommendation is not well
      substantiated. Weight loss in obese apneics improves but does not eliminate SDB. Moreover,
      the degree of improvement is not correlated with the amount of weight loss. This study will
      assess SDB before treatment and at 1 and 2 years. We will also investigate clinical measures
      of fat distribution that may mediate the non-linear relationship between weight loss and
      improvements in SDB. Finally, we will examine the role of SDB in mediating changes in blood
      pressure associated with weight loss.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The duration of the study is 5 years; participants will be enrolled in the study for a total
      of 2 years. Recruitment will be based on the protocol set forth in the larger Look AHEAD
      trial that will occur in 8 treatment waves, spaced approximately 4 months apart. Each of
      these waves at the Penn site will include 40 people, making the potential subject pool
      approximately 320 persons.

      Participants at the Penn site will be approximately 44 men and women, between 45 and 75
      years of age, with a body mass index (BMI) > 25 kg/m2. All subjects will be obese type 2
      diabetics who have been randomly assigned to the Lifestyle Intervention Group or the
      Diabetes Education and Support Group in the Look AHEAD Study. Therefore, the inclusion and
      exclusion criteria are determined by the parent study. Patients who are currently being
      treated for OSA (e.g., continuous positive airway pressure) or who have had surgical
      treatment for OSA will be excluded. Patients who have been previously diagnosed with OSA but
      are not being treated will be included. These 44 individuals represent a subset of the
      approximately 320 persons who will be treated at the University of Pennsylvania site.

      As part of the baseline visit (before randomization) for the Look AHEAD study, Look AHEAD
      participants will be asked to sign a consent form for screening. Consenting participants
      will complete the Multivariate Apnea Prediction Form. The MAP includes weight, height, age
      and 3 questions about sleep-related symptoms. After the prescreen consent has been
      completed, the Research Coordinator will invite the participant to complete the consent form
      for this study. Interested subjects will be scheduled to meet with this study's Research
      Coordinator during the subject's next scheduled Look AHEAD visit. Participants wishing to
      enroll will undergo the baseline assessments and be scheduled for their baseline sleep
      study. Subjects will be paid $50 for this sleep assessment. After completion of the baseline
      sleep study, the results will be analyzed. Thirty subjects with a baseline RDI > 15 and 28
      subjects with an RDI between 5 and 15 (5 < RDI < 15) will continue in the study, undergoing
      the same assessments at years 1 and 2.

      Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a syndrome characterized by frequent cessations of airflow
      during sleep (despite continued respiratory effort) that are caused by the closure of the
      pharyngeal airway. The most frequently used metric to describe OSA is the respiratory
      disturbance index (RDI) (sometimes referred to as the apnea-hypopnea index or AHI). RDI is
      defined as the average number of apnea/hypopnea events per hour of sleep. The medical
      consequences of OSA include an increased risk of hypertension, stroke, myocardial
      infarction, and premature mortality. The behavioral and psychosocial consequences of OSA
      include excessive daytime sleepiness, depression, sexual dysfunction, and a 3-7 fold
      increase in the risk of motor vehicle accidents. Among 30 to 60 year olds, 9% of women and
      24% of men in the general population have an RDI > 5. The serious consequences and high
      prevalence of OSA clearly constitute a major public health problem.

      OSA is strongly related to obesity, an important public health problem in its own right. In
      a series of 1000 OSA patients, two thirds had body weights > 30% above recommended. Several
      studies have identified body mass index (BMI) as the strongest predictor of RDI. Data from
      the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort Study revealed that a one standard deviation increase in BMI was
      associated with a four-fold increase in the risk of having an RDI > 5. Among obese patients
      seeking weight loss treatment, nearly 40% exhibited evidence of SDB, and 10% required
      treatment for OSA. The link between obesity and SDB is further supported by data showing
      that weight loss significantly improves SDB in obese patients with OSA. Perhaps the most
      compelling data about the effects of weight change on SDB, particularly weight gain, come
      from a very recent study of the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort that examined changes in weight and
      SDB over 4 years in a community sample of 690. On average, the sample experienced a 3 kg
      weight gain and 1.4/hr increase in RDI. Across the entire sample, on average, a 1% change in
      body weight was associated with a 3% change in RDI. Participants who reduced body weight by
      10% experienced a 26% reduction in RDI, while those who increased body weight by 10%
      experienced a 32% increase in RDI. A 10% weight gain was associated with a 6-fold increase
      in the risk of developing a RDI > 15. These descriptive, longitudinal data are suggestive of
      the benefits of weight loss on SDB, but several factors limit conclusions about the effects
      of weight loss on obese OSA patients. First, the initial mean RDI was 4.1, so very few
      subjects (n = 46) had moderate or severe OSA (RDI > 15). Further, only a small number of
      subjects (n = 61) lost > 5% of initial body weight. Finally, similar to the broader
      literature on the effects of weight loss, this study is limited by the lack of a no-weight
      loss control group and the inability to distinguish intentional from non-intentional weight
      loss.

      Weight loss is a frequently recommended treatment for obese patients with OSA, but the data
      to support this recommendation are not available. The lack of randomized trials, the study
      of predominantly male samples, and the absence of follow-up evaluations leave physicians and
      patients unsure about the clinical utility of weight loss for obese OSA patients. This study
      will assess the effects of weight loss on sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) in obese, type 2
      diabetics with OSA (RDI > 15) who will be randomly assigned to the Lifestyle Intervention
      Group or the Diabetes Education and Support Group conditions as part of the larger Look
      AHEAD trial. Our assessment of patients at baseline, and 1 and 2 years will allow us to
      examine the relationship between weight change and SDB over time. We will also examine the
      role of neck and abdominal fat distribution in mediating the effects of weight loss on SDB.
      Finally, we will assess the impact of SDB in mediating changes in blood pressure associated
      with weight loss.

      All subjects will be obese type 2 diabetics who are enrolled in the larger Look AHEAD Study.
      Fifty-eight subjects in total will be needed. Thirty of these subjects will have an RDI > 15
      and 28 subjects will have an RDI of 5-14.9 and all will have been randomized to either the
      Lifestyle Intervention Group or the Diabetes Education and Support Group.

      All participants will complete the following assessments:

      Nocturnal polysomnography (PSG). Overnight, unattended PSGs will be recorded in
      participants' homes using the Compumedics' PS2 portable sleep system. Two sleep technicians
      will go to the participant's home at 8:00-9:00 PM on the night of the PSG. A series of
      calibrations will be performed and signal quality and sensor positions will be adjusted as
      necessary. Before the technicians depart, the device will be set to activate 60 minutes
      prior to the subject's intended bedtime. The subject will then be asked to sit quietly and
      read or watch television for the duration of the time until lights out at his/her regular
      bedtime. The next morning, the 2 sleep technicians will return to the participant's home to
      remove the electrodes and sensors and to retrieve the equipment.

      Neck circumference. Neck fat distribution will be estimated by a measurement of the neck
      circumference at baseline and at 1 and 2 years by this study's Research Coordinator at the
      Look AHEAD annual clinic visit. All measurements will be performed twice and recorded to the
      nearest 0.1 cm.

      Blood pressure. Blood pressure will be assessed at baseline and at years 1 and 2 in the
      participant's home by the sleep technician. Measurements will be taken at night before the
      equipment is attached and in the morning after the equipment has been detached. Since the
      PSG is anchored to the participants usual sleep and wake schedule, we will obtain a morning
      and evening blood pressure at approximately the same times of day. Blood pressure will be
      measured in the dominant arm after 5 minutes of quiet rest in a seated position. Two
      measurements, separated by 1 minute, will be performed and averaged.

      Sagittal diameter. Sagittal diameter will be measured by the Holtain-Kahn Abdominal Caliper
      at baseline and at 1 and 2 years by the Research Coordinator at the Look AHEAD annual clinic
      visit. The measurement will be performed twice and recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm.

      Questionnaires. Daytime sleepiness will be assessed by the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS).
      The ESS is a self-administered questionnaire measuring the general level of daytime
      sleepiness. The ESS significantly distinguishes patients with and without OSA; a score above
      10 is considered indicative of pathological sleepiness. Furthermore, it has been shown to
      decrease for OSA patients treated with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). Quality
      of life specific to sleep apnea will be assessed by the Functional Outcomes of Sleep
      Questionnaire (FOSQ). The FOSQ is a measure assessing the impact of disorders of excessive
      sleepiness on functional outcomes relevant to daily behaviors and quality of life. The FOSQ
      reliably distinguishes apneics and controls and is sensitive to treatment effects. These
      measures will be assessed at baseline and at 1 and 2 years by this study's Research
      Coordinator at the Look AHEAD clinic visits and should take approximately 10 minutes to
      complete.

      Upper airway assessment. A brief (< 10 minutes) standardized clinical assessment of upper
      airway and craniofacial features that distinguishes apneics and non-apneics will be
      performed at baseline and at years 1 and 2 by the Research Coordinator.

      Sleep log. Participants will be given a sleep log to keep for 7 days prior to their in-home
      sleep study. Each morning when they wake up and each evening before going to bed they will
      answer a few questions concerning the quality of their sleep and their daytime activities.

      The procedures and treatments proposed in this study pose few known risks to subjects'
      physical and psychological well-being. The requirements imposed upon participants for this
      ancillary study pose no additional risks than those already present in the larger Look AHEAD
      trial. There are no invasive measures associated with this study.

      The benefits to the subjects studied in this research protocol, and to society at large, far
      surpass the risks. Our study will provide valuable sleep assessments to a population at high
      risk for sleep apnea, a significant benefit since most cases of SDB in the United States
      (90%) are undetected. Furthermore, our study will offer both patients and their physicians
      valuable information necessary in making subsequent decisions regarding the clinical
      management of any SDB. The requirements imposed upon participants for this ancillary study
      pose no additional risks than those already present in the larger Look AHEAD trial.

      Although weight loss is a frequently recommended treatment for obese patients with OSA,
      there has only been one randomized controlled trial including a no weight loss group.
      Therefore, findings from this study will provide important information to society at large
      in determining the effectiveness of weight loss treatment for OSA, a serious health problem.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Enrollment in LookAhead

          -  Type II Diabetes and Sleep Apnea

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Determined by parent study, LookAhead
