TITLE:
      Examining Genetic Influence on Response to Beta-Blocker Medications in People With Type 2 Diabetes
SUMMARY:
      Beta-blockers are medications used to treat cardiovascular disease (CVD) symptoms, including
      high blood pressure and chest pain. People with diabetes who receive beta-blockers may
      experience adverse health effects, but the exact cause of why this happens remains unknown.
      This study will examine the genetic factors that may influence how atenolol, a beta-blocker
      medication, affects fat breakdown, blood sugar levels, and heart function in people with
      type 2 diabetes.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      People with diabetes who develop CVD have worse health outcomes than people without diabetes
      who develop CVD. Beta-blockers are medications used to treat high blood pressure, angina
      (i.e., chest pain), arrhythmias, and other CVD conditions. While beta-blockers are effective
      at treating these conditions, they may also have damaging effects on cholesterol or glucose
      levels, thereby possibly lessening their ability to prevent CVD events in people with
      diabetes. It is important to identify which patients may not benefit from receiving
      beta-blocker medications. Genetic factors may influence how people respond to beta-blocker
      medications. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the influence of genetic variation on
      beta-blocker-induced changes in insulin sensitivity, fat breakdown, and heart function in
      people with type 2 diabetes.

      This study will enroll people with type 2 diabetes. At a series of up to three baseline
      study visits, participants will have a blood collection, a glucose tolerance test, an
      echocardiogram to obtain images of the heart, and biopsies of muscle from the thigh and fat
      from the stomach. All participants will then receive atenolol once a day for 8 weeks. During
      Week 1, participants will receive a low dose of atenolol. They will then attend a study
      visit at the end of Week 1, and study researchers will examine how well participants are
      tolerating the medication. If the atenolol is well tolerated, the dose will be increased.
      Study researchers will call participants 1 week after any dosage changes to monitor for side
      effects. Blood collection will occur again at a study visit at Week 4. At Week 8,
      participants will then attend up to three study visits for repeat baseline testing.
      Participants will then be slowly tapered off of atenolol over a 1-week period.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Type 2 diabetes for more than 1 year before study entry

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Insulin therapy

          -  Treatment with any beta-blocker in the 30 days before study entry

          -  Asthma

          -  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

          -  Greater than first degree heart block

          -  Heart rate less than 60 bpm

          -  Systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg

          -  Raynaud's phenomenon

          -  Known history of angina, heart attack, heart failure, coronary revascularization, or
             automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillators

          -  Pregnant

          -  Creatinine clearance less than 35 ml/min

          -  Hematologic dysfunction (white blood cell[WBC] count less than 3000 or hematocrit
             less than 28%)

          -  Allergy to amide anesthetics
