TITLE:
      Haemodynamic and Cardiovascular Effects of Carbetocin and Oxytocin
SUMMARY:
      A double-blinded randomised control trial conducted in the Department of Obstetrics and
      Gynaecology of a tertiary hospital, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre (UKMMC)
      for two years duration from January 1st, 2012 till December 31st, 2013.

      The aim of the study is to compare the haemodynamic and cardiovascular effects between
      intravenous carbetocin 100 μg and intravenous oxytocin 5 IU in women undergoing elective
      Lower Segment Caesarean Section (EL LSCS).

      Study hypothesis: A single injection of carbetocin is haemodynamically and cardiovascularly
      safe and has similar efficacy in comparison to a single injection of oxytocin.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      OUTCOME MEASURES systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), Heart Rate
      (HR), saturation of oxygen (SpO2) in certain time after drug injection.

      The presence of myocardial ischemia symptoms and side effects of both drugs, ECG changes
      such as ST depression and changes in T-waves.

      Hemoglobin and troponin-T level

      The need for additional oxytocin infusion and estimated blood loss

      The time interval between initial drug administration, type of additional oxytocic
      intervention that used and complication that happened.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Viable, singleton pregnancy ≥ 37 weeks gestation undergoing EL LSCS.

          2. Low risk for post-partum hemorrhage, such as no proven abruptio placentae, placenta
             previa, multiple pregnancy, pre-eclampsia / gestational hypertension, previous PPH,
             obesity (based on BMI pre pregnancy which is ≥ 30 kg/m2), big baby.

          3. Ability to provide informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Emergency caesarean section

          2. Preterm Labour

          3. Grandmultipara

          4. Multiple Pregnancy

          5. Placenta Previa

          6. Previous PPH

          7. Maternal Obesity ( BMI pre pregnancy ≥ 30 kg/m2))

          8. Have co-morbidity illness such as hypertension/pre-eclampsia, established cardiac
             diseases, history or evidence of liver, renal, vascular, or endocrine disease and
             bleeding disorder.

          9. Contraindication to carbetocin and oxytocin

         10. Language Barrier

         11. Women undergoing general anaesthesia

         12. Women who has abnormal baseline ECG that suggestive myocardial ischemia
