TITLE:
      Photodynamic Therapy Using Blue Light or Red Light in Treating Basal Cell Carcinoma in Patients With Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome
SUMMARY:
      This pilot randomized phase II trial studies how well photodynamic therapy using blue light
      or red light works in treating basal cell cancer (carcinoma) in patients with a genetic
      condition that causes unusual facial features and disorders of the skin, bones, nervous
      system, eyes, and endocrine glands, also called basal cell nevus syndrome. Photodynamic
      therapy uses drugs, such as aminolevulinic acid hydrochloride, that are taken up by tumor
      cells and when exposed to an intensive light source (blue light or red light) become active
      and may kill the cells. It is not yet known whether photodynamic therapy is more effective
      with blue light or red light in treating basal cell carcinoma.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      PRIMARY OBJECTIVES:

      I. To determine whether cyclic photodynamic therapy (PDT) treatment is effective in curing
      existing basal cell carcinoma (BCC) tumors in patients with basal cell nevus syndrome
      (BCNS), and whether red light or blue light is more effective in this regard.

      SECONDARY OBJECTIVES:

      I. To assess the tolerability (pain during treatment) of red light versus blue light in this
      patient population.

      II. To assess patient satisfaction with the technique.

      OUTLINE: Patients are randomized to 1 of 2 treatment arms.

      ARM I: Patients receive aminolevulinic acid hydrochloride topically. Beginning 4 hours
      later, patients undergo photodynamic therapy using blue light on the left side of the body
      and red light on the right side of the body on days 1 and 8. Treatment repeats every 2
      months for 3 courses in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity.

      ARM II: Patients receive aminolevulinic acid hydrochloride topically. Beginning 4 hours
      later, patients undergo photodynamic therapy using blue light on the right side of the body
      and red light on the left side of the body on days 1 and 8. Treatment repeats every 2 months
      for 3 courses in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity.

      After completion of study treatment, patients are followed up for 2 years.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  A diagnosis of basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS) as defined in the Consensus Statement
             (Bree et al, American Journal of Medical Genetics [Am J Med Genet] Part A
             155:2091-2097)

               -  Major criteria are:

                    -  BCC prior to age 20 years, or excessive number of BCCs out of proportion to
                       prior sun exposure and skin type

                    -  Keratocyst of the jaw prior to age 20

                    -  Palmar or plantar pitting

                    -  Lamellar calcification of the falx cerebri

                    -  Medulloblastoma

                    -  First degree relative with BCNS

               -  Minor criteria are:

                    -  Rib anomalies, or other specific skeletal malformations including
                       kyphoscoliosis and short 4th metacarpals

                    -  Macrocephaly

                    -  Cleft/lip or palate

                    -  Fibroma of the heart or ovary

                    -  Ocular abnormalities

                    -  Other rare abnormalities listed in the article by Bree et al

               -  For diagnosis of BCNS, the patient must have either 2 major criteria, one major
                  and two minor criteria, or one major criterion plus molecular confirmation of a
                  patched 1 (PTCH1) gene mutation

          -  At least two BCC tumors, preferably more; these tumors must be located in different
             body regions or alternatively, located > 10 cm apart at sites that can be
             reproducibly separated into red and blue illumination fields

          -  Female subjects must not become pregnant during the study; women of child-bearing
             potential must agree to use adequate contraception (double barrier method of birth
             control or abstinence) prior to study entry, and for the duration of study
             participation; should a woman become pregnant or suspect that she is pregnant while
             she is participating in this study, she should inform the treating physician
             immediately; for male participants in the study, the use of contraception for
             themselves or their partners is not required

          -  Subjects must be able to understand and be willing to sign a written informed consent
             document

          -  Patients should have a performance status (Karnofsky score) of > 80 out of 100, i.e.
             can carry on normal activity with effort while showing some signs or symptoms of
             disease

          -  Laboratory requirements:

               -  If the patient has never had a skin biopsy to establish the histological
                  diagnosis of BCC as part of his/her syndrome, then one lesion must be biopsied
                  prior to entry into the trial

               -  Any suspected BCC lesion of > 10 mm in diameter must be biopsied at the start of
                  the trial, to establish the histological subtype of the BCC

               -  Any presumed BCC lesion that fails to respond by the end of the trial must be
                  biopsied to rule out an incorrect diagnosis as a reason for the lack of response

               -  If a female patient suspects she is pregnant during the course of the trial, a
                  serum pregnancy test will be administered and if positive, any further PDT
                  treatments will be halted

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Pregnant or nursing

          -  Currently participating in another clinical trial

          -  Using any systemic treatment for BCC (e.g. vismodegib), or any topical treatment for
             their BCC tumors, unless discontinued at least one month prior

          -  Currently being treated for other cancers with medical or radiation therapy

          -  Patients with a known hypersensitivity to 5-aminolevulinic acid or any component of
             the study material

          -  Patients with history of a photosensitivity disease, such as porphyria cutanea tarda

          -  Patients with a coexisting skin condition such as scleroderma, psoriasis, or eczema
             in the skin areas to be treated with PDT, that might interfere with response
             assessment
