TITLE:
      A Dose Escalation Study of Intranasal Neuropeptide Y in Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
SUMMARY:
      This study is designed to investigate the safety of intranasal administration of NPY using a
      dose escalation, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled crossover design in a
      medication-free, symptomatic PTSD group.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Men and women, age 18-60.

          -  Participants must have a level of understanding sufficient to agree to all tests and
             examinations required by the protocol and must sign a written informed consent
             document. We determine whether they have a sufficient understanding of the study
             procedures and risks by asking them to explain what's involved in the study and to
             give examples of study risks and benefits.

          -  Participants must fulfill DSM-IV criteria for current PTSD, based on the Structured
             Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-I) and on the
             Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS).

          -  CAPS score must be at least 40 (moderate PTSD severity) at screening.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Current, primary Axis I disorders other than PTSD.

          -  History or current bipolar disorder or primary psychotic disorders (e.g.
             schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder).

          -  Current diagnosis of anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa.

          -  Women who are pregnant or are breast-feeding.

          -  Drug or alcohol abuse or dependence within the preceding 3 months.

          -  poorly controlled hypertension (manifest by SBP > 140 and/or DBP > 90); HR < 60 or >
             100 at rest at the time of screening and confirmed immediately prior to randomization

          -  Evidence of coronary artery disease as evidenced by history, abnormal ECG, typical
             symptoms

          -  History of arrhythmia, cardiac surgery, or family history of sudden death

          -  Hepatic dysfunction as defined by AST and ALT > 2x URL, or alkaline phosphatase and
             bilirubin > 1.5 x URL within X days prior to randomization

          -  Chronic renal disease as defined by serum creatinine > 1.9

          -  Any other serious or unstable clinically significant abnormal findings of laboratory
             parameters, physical examination, or ECG as determined by the PI.

          -  Any other serious or unstable condition that would put the subjects at undue risk as
             determined by the PI or additional safety monitor.

          -  Serious and imminent suicidal or homicidal risk.

          -  Psychotropic medication that will not be tapered off at least 7 days prior to
             screening; withdrawal symptoms must be absent at the time of screening

          -  History of nasal disorders or sinonasal surgery, or significant nasal abnormalities
             based on nasal exam.

          -  Received investigational intervention within 30 days prior to randomization
