TITLE:
      Efficacy Evaluation of the HEART Pathway in Emergency Department Patients With Acute Chest Pain
SUMMARY:
      Our research will examine a chest pain care strategy, called the HEART pathway, which is
      designed to correctly identify Emergency Department patients at high-risk for cardiovascular
      events, likely to benefit from further testing, and patients at very-low-risk for
      cardiovascular events, who may be safely discharged home. By using an individual's risk
      assessment to determining testing, we hope to improve the quality and efficiency of the care
      delivered to Emergency Department patients with chest pain. Our study will determine if the
      HEART pathway, which combines a clinical decision rule, the HEART score, and two serial
      troponin measurements, will reduce stress testing and cardiovascular imaging, decrease
      hospital length of stay, and reduce cost compared to usual care, while maintaining safety.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Approximately 8-10 million patients complaining of chest pain present to an Emergency
      Department (ED) annually in the United States. The total cost of chest pain evaluations has
      been estimated at $5-10 billion annually, yet only 10% of these patients are ultimately
      diagnosed with an acute coronary syndrome. American College of Cardiology/ American Heart
      Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines recommend that patients at low-risk for acute coronary
      syndrome should receive serial cardiac markers followed by objective cardiac testing (stress
      testing or cardiac imaging). However, many have questioned the value of objective cardiac
      testing in all low-risk patients.Cardiac testing for all patients at low-risk for acute
      coronary syndrome (ACS) is not sustainable from a healthcare quality or economic
      perspective. In addition to increasing costs, objective cardiac testing is associated with a
      substantial number of false positive and non-diagnostic tests, which lead to additional
      unnecessary and often invasive procedures.

      Implementation of accurate risk stratification care pathways designed to eliminate
      unnecessary cardiac testing could improve the efficiency and quality of care by decreasing
      false positive/non-diagnostic testing, radiation, and costs. The HEART pathway, which
      combines a clinical decision rule, the HEART score, and two serial troponin measurements, is
      a recently developed care pathway designed to identify chest pain patients for early
      discharge without objective testing.

      Primary Hypothesis: The HEART Pathway, when compared to usual care, will reduce 30 day
      objective cardiac testing, hospital length of stay, and cost, while maintaining patient
      safety.

      Methods: Participants (n=282) at risk for ACS will be recruited into a clinical trial from
      Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center (WFBMC) ED. Patients will be equally randomized to HEART
      Pathway or Usual Care. HEART Pathway participant's treating physician will follow HEART
      Pathway guidelines for identifying patients to be admitted to the hospital or observation
      unit for cardiac testing or to be discharged home without testing. Usual Care participant's
      treating physicians will decide whether the patients should be discharged home or admitted
      to the hospital or observation unit based on ACC/AHA guidelines without using the HEART
      pathway.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age greater than or equal to 21 years

          -  Chest discomfort or other symptoms consistent with possible ACS

          -  The treating physician feels the patient could be discharged home if cardiac disease
             was excluded

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  New ST-segment elevation in contiguous leads on any electrocardiogram (>/= 1 mV)

          -  Unstable vitals signs: symptomatic hypotension at the time of enrollment (systolic <
             90 mm Hg), tachycardia (HR>120), bradycardia (HR<40), and hypoxemia (<90%
             pulse-oximetry on room air or normal home oxygen flow rate)

          -  Terminal diagnosis with life expectancy less than 1 year

          -  A non-cardiac medical, surgical, or psychiatric illness determined by the provider to
             require admission, increase risk of objective cardiac testing, or prevent immediate
             discharge following negative testing.

          -  Prior enrollment

          -  Incapacity or unwillingness to provide consent and comply with study procedures

          -  Non-English speaking

        Sub-study I & II

        Inclusion Criteria:

          -  ED attending physicians

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  ED attending physicians who decline to participate
