TITLE:
      ACE Stapler Sub Study
SUMMARY:
      Obesity and its associated conditions have reached epidemic proportions. Estimates are that
      about one third of the adults in the United States have obesity. At this moment there are
      many therapeutic approaches for the treatment of obesity. But, efficacy of most treatment
      options are limited and so far surgical intervention has been proven to be the only strategy
      to overcome severe obesity. However, bariatric surgery has limitations and risks, which
      might be minimized by non-incisional endoscopic procedures.

      BaroSense developed a new device, called the Articulating Circular Endoscopic (ACETM)
      Stapler, which can be used in the treatment of obesity. It is a trans-oral procedure, which
      intends to reduce the ability of the stomach to expand by creating plications in the region
      of the fundus and greater curvature. In contrast with other bariatric surgery it is
      endoscopically performed, reversible and if it fails most future surgical options are still
      open.

      The main study ('Open, prospective study to evaluate the safety and preliminary
      effectiveness of the BaroSense ACE™ Stapler for the treatment of obesity', multicenter study
      (MUMC+, AMC and St. Antonius), accepted by MEC AMC) seeks to determine the safety and
      efficacy of this plicating system for patients with severe obesity.

      In this sub-study we want to unravel the exact mechanism and provide more information about
      the efficacy of the BaroSense ACE™ Stapler. Therefore we will measure changes in various
      parameters that are known to affect weight loss and metabolism, before and after gastric
      plication (by using the BaroSense ACE™ Stapler) in overweight subjects (these parameters
      will only be measured in patients at MUMC+). These parameters are post-prandial satiety,
      food-reward and related brain signalling, gastric emptying, behaviour towards food, food
      intake, satiety hormone release, microbiota composition and inflammatory markers.

      Objectives:

      Aim of the present study will be to assess the effect of the BaroSense ACE™ stapler on
      postprandial satiety, food-reward and related brain signalling, gastric emptying, behaviour
      towards food, food intake, hormone release, microbiota composition and inflammatory markers.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Criteria for inclusion in main ACE stapling study:

          -  Subject must be able to understand and be willing to sign an informed consent
             document.

          -  Subject must be willing and able to participate in all aspects of the study and agree
             to comply with all study requirements for the duration of the study. This includes
             availability of reliable transportation and sufficient time to attend all follow-up
             visits.

          -  Subject has a BMI of 40 - 45 or 30 to 39.9 plus one or more co-morbid diseases
             expected to improve with weight loss, including but not limited to hypertension,
             dyslipidemia, obstructive sleep apnea, or diabetes mellitus.

          -  Subject must be fully ambulatory, without chronic reliance on walking aids such as
             crutches, walkers or a wheelchair.

          -  Subject must be of sufficient and stable medical health, as evaluated by the
             Principal Investigator.

          -  Subject must have a primary care physician that will manage the subject for any
             co-morbid conditions throughout the study.

          -  Subject must have failed standard obesity therapy of diet, exercise, behaviour
             modification, and pharmacologic agents either alone or in combination, as assessed by
             an interview with a member of the study team at baseline.

          -  Subject agrees to refrain from any type of reconstructive surgery that may affect
             body weight such as mammoplasty or abdominal lipoplasty or liposuction, during the
             trial.

        Inclusion criteria sub study

        • Patient must be included in the main study

        Exclusion Criteria:

        Main study

          -  Subject has history of/or signs and/or symptoms of gastro-duodenal ulcer disease.

          -  Subject has poorly controlled diabetes as indicated by the lack of stable diabetes
             medications and doses over the last month, or has a history of diabetes for greater
             than 10 years.

          -  Subject has had significant weight loss in the last 3 months, or between baseline and
             the study procedure.

          -  Subject has a history or is diagnosed with eating disorders.

          -  Subject has history of peptic ulcer and tests positive for H. pylori, unless treated
             before the procedure.

          -  Subject has symptomatic congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmia or unstable
             coronary artery disease.

          -  Subject has pre-existing respiratory disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
             disease (COPD), pneumonia or cancer.

          -  Subject has significant esophageal disease including Zenker's diverticulum, grade 3-4
             reflux esophagitis, stricture, Barrett's esophagus, esophageal cancer, esophageal
             diverticulum, dysphagia, achalasia, or symptoms of dysmotility.

          -  Subject is observed during EGD to have heavily scarred, malignant or poor
             quality/friable tissue in areas of the stomach where plications are to be placed.

          -  Subject has renal and/or hepatic insufficiency.

          -  Subject has thyroid disease which is not controlled with medication.

          -  Subject has a history of intestinal strictures or adhesions.

          -  Subject has systemic infection in the body at the time of the plication procedure.

          -  Female subject who is pregnant (i.e., has a positive urine or blood pregnancy test
             prior to the procedure), is suspected to be pregnant, is lactating or is of
             childbearing potential but refuses to use adequate contraception during the study.

          -  Female subject who started birth control pills less than 3 months before enrollment,
             or who plans to start taking birth control pills during the study.

          -  Subject has had previous bariatric, gastric or esophageal surgery; intestinal
             obstruction; portal gastropathy; gastrointestinal tumors; esophageal or gastric
             varices, or gastroparesis.

          -  Subject has severe coagulopathy (prothrombin time > 3 seconds over control or
             platelet count < 100,000) or is presently taking heparin, coumadin, warfarin, or
             other anticoagulants or other medications which impede coagulation or platelet
             aggregation.

          -  Subject has chronic/acute upper GI bleeding conditions.

          -  Subjects who are unable to discontinue use of aspirin and/or non-steroidal
             anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) at least 14 days prior to a plication procedure and
             continuing for 14 days post-procedure.

          -  Subjects undergoing chronic steroid therapy.

          -  Subjects undergoing immunosuppressive therapy.

          -  Subjects who cannot discontinue either prescription or over the counter weight loss
             medications for at least 30 days prior to the procedure as well as during the trial
             period.

          -  Subjects who have started medications within the last 3 months that are known to
             cause weight gain.

          -  Subjects who have cardiac pacemakers or other electronic implantable devices.

          -  Subjects who have hiatal hernias greater than 2 cm.

          -  Subjects who have current or potential neck masses that in the opinion of the
             investigator, may interfere with study-related procedures, or has a Mallampati
             (intubation) score greater than 3.

          -  Subjects who have poorly controlled psychiatric disease including but not limited to
             manic-depressive disorder, schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, depression
             or suicidal tendencies.

          -  Subject has Crohn's disease or Ulcerative Colitis.

          -  Subject currently uses or has a history of illicit drug(s) or abuses alcohol (defined
             as regular or daily consumption of more than 4 alcoholic drinks per day).

          -  Subject has participated in a clinical study with an investigational new drug,
             biological, or therapeutic device within ≤ 28 days prior to enrollment in this study,
             and does not agree to abstain from participation in other clinical trials of any kind
             during this study.

        Exclusion criteria sub study

          -  Presence of contra-indications for MRI and f-MRI, as mentioned in Attachment 1 and 2.

          -  Hypersensibility to contrast (Dotarem)

          -  Claustrophobia

          -  Pregnancy
