TITLE:
      Environmental and Genetic Factors That Influence Cardiovascular Disease in African Americans
SUMMARY:
      This is a prospective study of the environmental and genetic factors that influence the
      development of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in African American men and women. The cohort is
      an expansion of the Jackson, Mississippi site of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
      (ARIC) study and is a partnership among two minority institutions (Jackson State University
      and Tougaloo College), one majority institution in Jackson, Mississippi (the University of
      Mississippi Medical Center), the National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center on
      Minority Health and Health Disparities (NCMHD), and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
      Institute (NHLBI).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Heart disease and stroke remain the first and third leading killers of all Americans, with a
      disproportionate share of the burden borne by African Americans. Cardiovascular and total
      mortality are known to be higher among African Americans than among white Americans, but
      reasons for these differences remain unknown. In addition, well-documented declines in CVD
      and coronary disease mortality in the past three decades have not been shared equally
      between blacks and whites. Age-adjusted death rates were identical in both groups in 1980,
      but by 1994 the rate among African Americans was 14% higher than in whites. The race
      difference in magnitude of coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality is greater in women than
      men and higher in middle age, such that CHD deaths tend to occur in blacks about 5 years
      earlier than in whites. Excess cerebrovascular disease incidence and mortality in blacks are
      even greater than the differences noted in CHD.

      Cardiovascular mortality rates in Mississippi, which are approximately 25% higher than the
      United States average, are the highest in the United States for all race-sex groups.
      Age-adjusted CVD mortality for African American women in Mississippi was 75% higher than in
      white women in 1994. The mortality for African American men was 47% higher than in white
      men.

      Prevalence of hypertension is nearly 40% greater in African Americans than in whites and its
      sequelae are more frequent and severe. Evidence of target organ damage such as renal failure
      and left ventricular hypertrophy is more common in black than white hypertensives at
      comparable levels of blood pressure. Many risk factors are also more common in blacks,
      including diabetes, high serum lipoprotein levels [Lp(a)], and obesity (in women). Other
      risk factors, such as elevated total cholesterol, reduced high-density lipoprotein
      (HDL)-cholesterol, and heavy cigarette smoking, are more common in whites.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The Jackson Heart Study (JHS) initial examination, which began in the fall of 2000, included
      men and women ages 35 to 84, and took 3 years to complete. The coordinating center, located
      at Jackson State University, collects and analyzes data. The undergraduate training center
      at Tougaloo College offers coursework to students in public health and epidemiology, and
      provides practical experience in health research to prepare them for potential careers in
      these fields. The exam center at the University of Mississippi is responsible for recruiting
      participants and conducting examinations. JHS is uniquely positioned to answer key questions
      regarding the excess burden of CVD among African Americans and to address the critical
      shortage of minority investigators trained in epidemiology and prevention. These questions
      will be answered by incorporating state-of-the-art physiologic and epidemiologic methods in
      a stable population-based minority cohort, providing research experience, and building
      research capabilities at minority institutions. The Second Exam began in September 2005.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  African American
