TITLE:
      Clinical Study of Recombinant Mycobacterium Tuberculosis ESAT6-CFP10 Allergen
SUMMARY:
      720 cases TB (Tuberculosis patients) participants and 360 cases non-TB participants with
      lung disease who all meet the standard are divided into different groups through a
      randomized and blind method. Every subject inject intradermally ESAT6-CFP10 and TB-PPD
      (tuberculin purified protein derivative) in different arms of the same person by blind
      method. Specific gama-interferon (γ-IFN) detection is needed before the injection.Measure
      the induration and (or) redness of longitudinal diameter size and transverse diameter
      vernier caliper by vernier caliper after injection 24h, 48h and 72h. At the same time, we
      observe all kind of adverse events.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Firstly, 720 cases TB (Tuberculosis) participants who meet the standard respectively are
      divided into different groups through a randomized and blind method.

        1. ESAT6-CFP10(10ug/ml) in left arm

        2. ESAT6-CFP10(10ug/ml) in right arm. Inject intradermally ESAT6-CFP10 and TB-PPD in
           different arms of the same participant. For each of participant, the person in this
           clinical research, the study uniform is that every subject injects firstly left arm,
           observe no obvious adverse reaction, then another drug inject in right arm. Measure the
           induration and (or) redness of longitudinal diameter size and transverse diameter
           vernier caliper by vernier caliper after injection 24h, 48h and 72h. At the same time,
           we observe the vital signs (breathing, heart rate, blood pressure and temperature),
           local reactions (rash, pain, itching and skin mucous membrane) and a variety of adverse
           events.

      Secondly, 360 cases non-TB participants with lung disease are divided into two different
      groups and the procedure are as the same as 720 cases TB.

      Finally, we calculate the sensitivity (positive coincidence rate) by TB (Tuberculosis
      patients), the specificity (negative coincidence rate) by non-TB participants with lung
      disease, and verify the safety and effectiveness of ESAT6-CFP10(10ug/ml) for the clinical
      auxiliary diagnosis of tuberculosis.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria of TB (tuberculosis:include pulmonary tuberculosis and extra pulmonary
        tuberculosis) subjects:

          -  judge the pulmonary tuberculosis patient according to Health industry standard of the
             People's Republic of China WS288-2008:Diagnostic Criteria for pulmonary tuberculosis;

          -  18 to 65 years old ,no gender limited;

          -  Consent and signed informed consent forms (ICF);

          -  Comply with follow-up.

        Inclusion Criteria of extra pulmonary tuberculosis subjects:

          -  Diagnosed extra pulmonary tuberculosis by epidemiology, imaging, clinical symptoms,
             pathological examination and so on;

          -  Lesions outside the lungs;

          -  be in unfinished reinforced phase by chemotherapy;

        Exclusion Criteria of TB (tuberculosis) subjects:

          -  Accompanied by the following severe illness:advanced cancer, diabetes, copd in acute
             episodes, acute/progressive liver disease or kidney disease, congestive heart
             failure, ect;

          -  Taking part in other clinical or within three months involved in any other clinical;

          -  Severe allergic constitution:allergic to two or more drugs;

          -  in pregnancy or lactation;

          -  in a mental illness;

          -  Any conditions affect the trial evaluation by investigator's judgement.

        Inclusion Criteria of non-TB participants with lung disease:

          -  A clear lung disease but can exclude pulmonary tuberculosis by clinical symptoms,
             imaging, laboratory examination.

          -  18 to 65 years old, no gender limited;

          -  Consent and signed informed consent forms (ICF);

          -  Comply with follow-up.

        Exclusion Criteria of non-TB participants with lung disease:

          -  Accompanied by the following severe illness: advanced cancer, diabetes, copd in acute
             episodes, acute/progressive liver disease or kidney disease, congestive heart
             failure, ect;

          -  Taking part in other clinical or within three months involved in any other clinical;

          -  Severe allergic constitution: allergic to two or more drugs;

          -  in pregnancy or lactation;

          -  in a mental illness;

          -  history of tuberculosis;

          -  Any conditions affect the trial evaluation by investigator's judgement.
