TITLE:
      Hair Cortisol Level as a Predictor of PTSD Development
SUMMARY:
      Post-traumatic stress disorder, PTSD, is one of the most prevalent psychiatric disorders.

      As casualties of motor vehicle accidents, criminal acts or terrorism are arriving to the ER,
      it is almost impossible to conclude who will overcome his psychiatric trauma and will be
      able to return to his normal life course and who will be thrown out of his promising life
      trajectory.

      Current attempts to identify those who are at the greatest risk are still unsatisfactory,
      which comprise a therapeutic dilemma, since the interventions used to ameliorate and prevent
      the occurrence of PTSD in a high-risk patient, might be counter-productive and even
      precipitate the emergence of PTSD in lower-risk patients.

      Since PTSD is closely related to the "Fight, Flight or Freeze" reaction, it has much to do
      with the autonomic nervous system and the major stress hormone, cortisol. Despite many
      studies demonstrating the involvement of those factors in the development of PTSD, various
      attempts to profile the direction of the association between PTSD and cortisol abnormalities
      have yielded conflicting results.

      The introduction of a novel method of assessing the excretion of cortisol using residues in
      the human hair shaft, has allowed an unprecedented evaluation of its activity over a
      prolonged period of time.

      Using this novel method of cortisol assessment, the investigators aim to identify biomarkers
      that will be able to aid in the prediction of PTSD development ahead of symptoms emergence,
      and will enhance the understanding of the physiological mechanism involved and etiology of
      this disorder.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) stems from an event that is perceived as a threat to
      the physical and psychological integrity of the individual. Despite evidence pointing at
      predisposing or protective factors, it is extremely difficult to predict who will develop
      PTSD after exposure to a traumatic event. However, it is of a paramount importance to
      predict such a clinical course, in order to intervene at an early stage and facilitate
      research that may lead to prevention of the disorder.

      As certain features of PTSD closely resemble the response of the adrenergic system via the
      fight or flight mechanism, substantial effort was made to understand the role of the
      hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the autonomic nervous system (ANS) in the
      development and maintenance of this disorder.

      Various studies demonstrated conflicting findings, both in the trend of the level of
      cortisol and in the timing of the endocrinological anomaly. Additional study assessed the
      effect of HPA axis suppression by dexamethasone on anxiety-related symptoms in healthy
      volunteers subjected to a stress test. Those participants whose HPA axis was inhibited,
      presented a significant increase in anxiety symptoms, compared to a control group.

      Variability and lack of stability are the main disadvantages of current methods quantifying
      systemic cortisol levels via measurements in the plasma, urine and saliva. These
      shortcomings undermine the effort to understand the role of the HPA axis in PTSD. Variable
      timing of the tests, as well as the stress involved in psychiatric examination and
      phlebotomy, are also major confounders in such an effort. Recently, the introduction of a
      novel test of hair cortisol concentration (HCC) has enabled retrospective quantification of
      cortisol levels, and thus the HPA axis activity, over a prolonged period of time.

      As hair grows, unbounded cortisol is incorporated into the hair shaft in a manner that
      correlates with the amount of unbounded plasma cortisol at that time period. Since scalp
      hair grows at a fairly constant rate of 1cm per month, especially in the posterior vertex
      area, analysis of 3cm would reflect the average level of unbounded cortisol throughout the
      previous 3 months. Several studies in animals and humans have established the test's
      stability over time, thus proving that the test reliably reflects major changes in the HPA
      axis. Studies evaluating this novel test in the field of mental health demonstrated
      variations of cortisol levels in a number of clinical populations: increased hair cortisol
      levels were demonstrated for a 6 month period in depressed patients compared to controls;
      communities exposed to the horrors of war in Uganda had elevated cortisol levels compared to
      Ugandan communities not living in war zones; among patients with generalized anxiety
      disorder (GAD), there were lower hair cortisol levels in comparison with a control
      population, despite similar cortisol saliva levels.

      In addition to the advantage of a reliable measurement of unbound plasma cortisol levels
      over time, this novel test is also easy to perform, easy to store and causes minimal
      inconvenience to the patient with no actual risks.

      The use of this novel method of testing for cortisol level over prolong periods of time
      enables us to study the course of the HPA axis in relation to stressors: the baseline
      status, the immediate aftermath and the continuous effects of the traumatic event on the
      axis. Such valuable information can aid in the ongoing debate, whether the baseline function
      of the HPA axis is a core predisposing factor or, in fact, a secondary causality of the
      traumatic event.

      Achieving better understanding of the complex interplay between those biological mechanisms
      and the formation of PTSD might enable the targeting of high-risk population after traumatic
      exposure with pharmacological and psychological interventions.

      Study Hypothesis Main Hypothesis

        1. Hair cortisol level previous to the trauma will correlate with PTSD development.

           Secondary Hypothesis

        2. Ratio between hair cortisol levels prior to trauma to saliva cortisol level following
           the traumatic event will correlate with PTSD development.

        3. Saliva cortisol level immediately after trauma will correlate with PTSD development.

        4. Hair cortisol level one month post trauma will correlate with PTSD development.

        5. Ratio between saliva cortisol levels to saliva alpha-amylase level (both taken at ER
           immediately after trauma) will correlate with PTSD development.

        6. Patients with a difference between hair cortisol levels 3 months prior to the traumatic
           event and levels during the 3 months following it, are more prone to developing PTSD.

      Study Methods Prospective observational study, performed at Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba,
      Israel and Shalvata Mental Health Center, Hod Hasharon, Israel.

      50 men and women arriving at Meir medical center Emergency department, as a result of a
      traumatic civil event, will be recruited.

      Participants will fill out demographic and medical history questionnaires, and a structured
      psychiatric interview (M.I.N.I) will be performed to exclude any active psychiatric
      disorder. If none of the exclusion criteria met, several procedures will be performed:

        1. Sampling hair from the posterior vortex.

        2. Sampling blood cortisol and saliva cortisol and alpha-amylase.

        3. Documenting pulse at the time of admission to the ER and 6 hours following the event.

        4. Filling a number of questionnaires: SLE (stressful life events); BDI (Beck Depression
           Scale); MADRSS (Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale); STAI (State & Trait Anxiety
           Inventory); VAS-A, VAS-D; PDEQ (Peritraumatic Dissociation Experience Questionnaire);
           SASRQ (Stanford Acute Stress Reaction Questionnaire).

      Psychiatric follow-up will be performed at 4 time points, in relation to the traumatic
      event: After 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months. During each assessment, the
      following procedures will be performed:

        1. Sampling hair from the posterior vortex.

        2. Filling out a number of questionnaires: BDI, MADRSS, STAI, VAS-A, VAS-D, CAPS
           (Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale), PSS (PTSD Symptoms Scale).

      Relevance of potential study findings The proposed study will provide novel information on
      the role of the HPA axis in the development of PTSD. By answering this old, unresolved
      question the investigators will achieve an understanding of the neurobiological mechanism
      and may be able to predict the development of the disorder at an early, sub-clinical stage.
      The results of the study will also contribute to the understanding and rationale of the
      possibility of steroid treatment following an acute traumatic event.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age 18-50

          -  Experienced a traumatic event fitting criterion A1 (stressor), A2 (Reaction) and at
             least 1 out of the B criterion in the ASD criteria in the DSM-IV-TR

          -  Brought to the ER within hours of the traumatic event.

          -  Signed an informed consent

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Known psychiatric disorder or current psychiatric medication

          -  Complex injury or need for a complex medical treatment, such as operation, Packed RBC
             or admission extending 36 hours.

          -  Disorientation, confusion, head injury including intra-cranial bleeding, LOC or a
             major neurological deficit.

          -  Known disorder of the HPA axis or use of steroidal medications within the previous 3
             years.

          -  known neurological disease or previous brain surgery.

          -  Major medical conditions or using medication known to influence the HPA or ANS Axis.

          -  Baldness or hair shorter than 1cm.

          -  Using color dyes.

          -  Pregnancy.
