TITLE:
      Characteristics of Prader-Willi Syndrome and Early-onset Morbid Obesity
SUMMARY:
      Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder that affects about 1 in 14,000 people
      in the United States. As the most commonly identified genetic cause of obesity, PWS is often
      confused with Early-onset Morbid Obesity (EMO). Individuals with EMO show some signs of PWS,
      but clinically do not have PWS. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the clinical
      features and genetic basis of PWS and EMO, and to determine how these conditions affect a
      person throughout a lifetime.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      PWS is a complex neurobehavioral syndrome. Clinical features include obesity, increased
      appetite, low muscle tone, cognitive impairment, distinct behavioral features, hypogonadism,
      and neonatal failure-to-thrive. It is the most commonly recognized genetic cause of obesity;
      however, many obese children do not in fact have PWS. These individuals are therefore
      diagnosed with EMO, a condition that shares features with PWS. The development of new
      advances and strategies for treating PWS and EMO requires a thorough understanding of the
      conditions at both the clinical and molecular levels. One goal of this study is to collect
      long-term data on individuals with PWS and EMO in order to gain a better understanding of
      the natural progression of the conditions, from the neonatal period well into adulthood.
      Specific to PWS, this study will establish a genotype-phenotype correlation among the
      different sub-types and will evaluate the effects of growth hormone treatment on disease
      progression. Lastly, the study will compare PWS with EMO in terms of clinical features and
      genetic basis.

      Participation in this natural history study will entail an initial evaluation, followed by
      yearly study visits until the age of 3 and then every 2 years thereafter. Each study visit
      will last between 3 and 4 hours, and will include a physical exam (including a DEXA scan to
      determine body composition), psychological testing, an interview with the study physician,
      and an evaluation of the participant's diet history. In addition, blood tests will be
      completed for genetic testing and photos will be taken to evaluate disease progression.
      Cognitive and behavioral assessments will also be conducted and will last between 10 and 30
      minutes.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Individuals enrolling in the Prader-Willi syndrome group will have a confirmed
             diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome, as confirmed by molecular and cytogenetic testing

          -  Individuals enrolling in the Early-onset Morbid Obesity group will have a documented
             medical history of their weight exceeding 150% of the ideal body weight or a body
             mass index greater than 97% before the age of 4 years; they will also be under the
             age of 30 years.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Known genetic, chromosomal, or hormonal cause of cognitive impairment other than
             Prader-Willi syndrome
