TITLE:
      PROTECT Continued Access Post Marketing Surveillance Trial
SUMMARY:
      In order to expand safety information in patients treated with the Endeavor Drug Eluting
      Stent System, or next generation model, a Continued Access (CA) study is added to the
      PROTECT Trial. The amended study is "PROTECT CONTINUED ACCESS" ("PROTECT CA").
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This was a prospective, multicenter, non-randomized, single-arm, open-label post market
      surveillance study designed to expand safety information in patients treated with the
      Endeavor® Zotarolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System.

      Since their introduction, Drug Eluting Stents (DES) have markedly decreased stent restenosis
      and the clinical need for repeat revascularization frequently observed with bare metal
      stents (BMS)1-10. However, the widespread use of DES has raised concerns regarding the
      occurrence of late stent thrombosis (> 30 days after stent implantation)12-14. Although the
      incidence might seem low (0.2-0.7%)13,15-18 the high mortality and morbidity associated with
      stent thrombosis, and the soaring number of stents implanted annually, make it a significant
      medical problem.

      The purpose of this trial was to investigate the long-term clinical safety and efficacy of
      the Endeavor drug eluting stent in a large and higher risk patient population, which more
      closely reflects clinical practice today. Both unstable and stable patients with single or
      multivessel disease and complex lesions were eligible for enrollment.

      The selected primary endpoint was stent thrombosis, defined as definite and probable stent
      thrombosis according to the ARC definition, at 3 years. The main secondary endpoints were
      the composite of death or cardiac death combined with large or all non-fatal myocardial
      infarction, which are the typical clinical manifestations of stent thrombosis. These events
      are adjudicated by a clinical events committee.

      1.2 Study Endpoints 1.2.1 Primary Endpoint: The overall stent thrombosis rate defined as
      definite and probable stent thrombosis according to the ARC definition at 3 years 1.2.2
      Secondary Endpoints:

      Main Secondary Endpoints include:

        -  Composite endpoint of total death and number of patients with all non-fatal myocardial
           infarction at 3 years

        -  Composite endpoint of cardiac death and number of patients with all non-fatal
           myocardial infarction at 3 years

        -  Composite endpoint of total death and number of patients with large non-fatal
           myocardial infarction at 3 years

        -  Composite endpoint of cardiac death and number of patients with large non-fatal
           myocardial infarction at 3 years

      Additional secondary endpoints include:

        -  Total Death and subcategories of Death

        -  Large and all Myocardial Infarction (MI)

        -  Stent thrombosis defined as definite, probable and possible

        -  Composite score of clinical outcomes (death, myocardial infarction, stroke and
           revascularization) *

        -  Major Adverse Cardiac and Cerebral Events (MACCE)

        -  Stroke (hemorrhagic in nature while on clopidogrel)

        -  Bleeding complications in general

        -  Target lesion revascularization (TLR)

        -  Target vessel revascularization (TVR)

        -  Non target vessel revascularization (non TVR)

        -  Procedural success

        -  Device success

        -  Lesion success

        -  Endpoints will be calculated at the follow-up time points and for the mean follow-up
           period.

             -  The composite score of clinical outcomes (death, myocardial infarction, stroke and
                revascularization) constructed from a patient population according to the Delphi
                method.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Patient is > 18 years of age (or minimum age as required by local regulations).

          2. The patient or patient's legal representative has consented to participate and has
             authorized the collection and release of his medical information by signing the
             "Patient Informed Consent Form".

          3. All lesions requiring interventions (target lesions - one to a maximum of four) in
             one or more native coronary arteries are amendable for implantation of one or more
             Endeavor® Zotarolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System.

          4. Patient indication, lesion length and vessel diameter of the target lesion(s) are
             according to the 'Indications for Use' as mentioned in the 'Instructions for Use'
             that comes with every Endeavor® Zotarolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System. Please
             check the 'Instructions for Use' that comes with the product. Please be aware that
             the 'Instructions for Use' may be subject to change during the course of the study.

        5 The patient is willing and able to cooperate with study procedures and required follow
        up visits.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Women with known pregnancy or who are lactating.

          2. Planned elective surgery necessitating discontinuation of clopidogrel within the
             regular planned period of clopidogrel administration.

          3. Patients expected not to be compliant with the anti-platelet and/or anticoagulation
             therapy regimen.

          4. Previous brachytherapy.

          5. Previous implantation of a drug eluting stent.

          6. Previous implantation of a bare metal stent in the preceding year.

          7. Simultaneous or planned intervention other non cardiac vessels including but not
             limited to renal artery or carotid artery.

          8. Current medical condition with a life expectancy of less than 3 years.

          9. Manifest acute severe heart failure (Killip class III-IV).

         10. The patient is currently, and during the first 3 years of the PROTECT trial,
             participating in another investigational device or drug study that clinically
             interferes with the PROTECT-study endpoints; or requires coronary angiography or
             other coronary artery imaging procedures. The patient may only be enrolled in the
             PROTECT-study once.

         11. Patients with medical conditions that preclude the follow-up as defined in the
             protocol or that otherwise limits participation in this study.

         12. Patients on warfarin or similar anti-coagulant therapy.

         13. Patients with hypersensitivity or allergies to one of the drugs or components
             indicated in the Instructions for Use.

         14. Patients who are judged to have a lesion that prevents complete inflation of an
             angioplasty balloon.

         15. Patients in whom anti-platelet and/or anticoagulation therapy is contraindicated.

        16 Transplant patients.
