TITLE:
      Safety and Efficacy Study of Hairstetics' ANCHORING SYSTEM For Hair Extensions For Subjects Affected With Hair Thinning
SUMMARY:
      The aim of the study is to assess the safety (by side effects) and efficacy (holding the
      hair extensions and subjects and operator satisfaction) of the Hairstetics' Anchoring System
      in subjects affected with hair loss presents with hair thinning, that are to be treated by
      hair extensions.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      STUDY DESIGN - This is a prospective, single-arm, multi-center, international, open-label,
      non-randomized, two-stage clinical study. First stage will enroll 6 subjects (at any site)
      that will be followed-up for 3 months post implantation of the anchoring system, which was
      already used in other clinical studies for other indication. These 6 subjects will serve for
      product registration in Israel and/or CE mark. The second stage will starts upon the
      completion of successful first stage, and will include additional up to 20 subjects that
      will be followed again for 3 months. For this second stage, subjects who wish to continue
      the follow-up voluntarily may do so up to one year with optional visits at 6 months and 12
      months. At any point, the study will convert to a post marketing study once a CE mark is
      obtained.

      ENDPOINTS -

      Primary Endpoint - Safety:

      Acceptable number, duration and severity of Expected Adverse Device/Procedure Effects during
      3 months following the implantation of the anchoring system. Once the study will convert to
      a post marketing one, this primary end point will become a secondary safety endpoint.

      Primary Endpoint - Efficacy:

      Acceptable number of anchoring systems (one system is comprised of a linear set of 12-20
      miniature implants) that holds their respective hair extensions for a 3 months period.

      Secondary Endpoints - Efficacy:

        -  Subject's satisfactions with the aesthetic outcome at 3 months post the implantation of
           the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Investigator satisfaction based on subjective evaluation and photos at 3 months post
           the implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Optional- Subject's satisfactions with the aesthetic outcome at 6 months post the
           implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Optional- Investigator satisfaction based on subjective evaluation and photos at 12
           months post the implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair
           extensions.

        -  Optional- Subject's satisfactions with the aesthetic outcome at 6 months post the
           implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Optional- Investigator satisfaction based on subjective evaluation and photos at 12
           months post the implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair
           extension.

      STUDY PROCEDURE - Once the subject was shown to be eligible for the study per eligibility
      criteria and after signing the Informed Consent Form and the post implantation maintenance
      protocol, and the investigator have signed the eligibility statement, the subject will
      undergo the Hairstetics' Anchoring System implantation (up to 10 sets of Anchoring System)
      to which hair extensions will be attached. The implantation will be done according to the
      device's IFU.

      In the first stage, 6 subjects will be followed for 3 months, and in the second stage
      additional up to 20 subjects will be followed for 3 months post the implantation of the
      anchoring systems and their respective hair extensions. In this second stage, subjects who
      wish to continue the follow-up voluntarily may do so up to one year with optional visits at
      6 months and 12 months.

      SUBJECT POPULATION - Men and Women with hair loss of different etiologies, including post
      radiation/chemotherapy alopecia, post-burn alopecia, cicatricial alopecia, androgenetic
      alopecia or alopecia due to traumatic injuries or skin disease, altogether presents with
      hair thinning, that are scheduled for treating with hair extensions and who are eligible to
      be recruited according to the protocol inclusion and exclusion criteria.

      STUDY DURATION - For the first stage, the anticipated enrollment rate is expected to be
      approximately 2 subjects per month, per site, so it is expected to take 1.5 months to enroll
      (from 2 sites) and additional 3 months for follow-up. Then, for the second stage, the
      recruitment rate is expected to be the same, and therefore the duration will be up to 5
      months for recruiting and additional 3 months follow-up. So, the total study is 4.5 months
      (stage 1) + 8 months (stage 2) to reach 12.5 months in total and potentially up to 21.5
      months (due to the optional follow up of 12 months).

      STATISTICAL ANALYSIS - General - Descriptive statistics will be presented on a per visit
      basis.

      Primary Endpoint-Safety:All the expected device/procedure related AEs, the action taken and
      the severity and outcome will be listed for 3 months following the implantation session (All
      Non-Device/Procedure related AEs will be listed in a similar manner only for the initial 1
      month). Once the study will convert to a post marketing one, this primary endpoint will
      become a secondary safety endpoint.

      Primary Endpoint - Efficacy:

      Subject must follow the post implantation protocol to allow the anchors to hold their
      respective hair extensions. The number of systems in total, in all subjects, that will hold
      their respective hair extensions will be recorded at 3 months.

      Secondary Endpoint-Efficacy and Safety:

      Questionnaires for subjects and investigators, as well as photography will serve to assess
      and to analyze the secondary endpoints for efficacy.

        -  Subject's satisfactions with the aesthetic outcome at 3 months post the implantation of
           the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Investigator satisfaction based on subjective evaluation and photos at 3 months post
           the implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Optional- Subject's satisfactions with the aesthetic outcome at 6 months post the
           implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Optional- Investigator satisfaction based on subjective evaluation and photos at 6
           months post the implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair
           extensions.

        -  Optional- Subject's satisfactions with the aesthetic outcome at 12 months post the
           implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair extensions.

        -  Optional- Investigator satisfaction based on subjective evaluation and photos at 12
           months post the implantation of the anchoring system and their respective hair
           extensions.

      INTERIM AND FINAL ANALYSIS - Two reports will be issued. One interim report after the
      initial stage 1 six subjects for both safety and efficacy, and a final report that will be
      generated at the end of the study.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Subject is ≥ 19 years old.

          2. Subject has hair thinning of any etiology and has chosen to undergo hair extensions
             treatment.

          3. Subject has mental capacity to understand study guidelines and requirements (to
             maintain scalp hygiene, delicate combing, etc.).

          4. Subject has been evaluated by the investigator to have a scalp condition in the
             planned area of implantation that is acceptable for entering the study and currently
             is NOT suffering from skin problems at planned implantation site around it.

          5. Subject has Good general health.

          6. Woman of child bearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test.

          7. Subject willing to sign a written informed consent form (ICF) and the post
             implantation maintenance protocol.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Previous other synthetic hair implants or hair transplantation in the past six
             months. Subjects with previous Hairstetics' implants implanted less than 6 month
             prior to screening are allowed, if the implants are located in a different location
             on the scalp.

          2. Currently suffering from skin problems at planned implantation site or around it that
             might affect the procedure and/or success as clinically evaluated by the
             investigator.

          3. Currently receiving or have within the past 3 months received radiation- and/or
             chemotherapy.

          4. Currently using steroid product with Immunosuppressive treatment.

          5. Impaired coagulation.

          6. Serious illness that may affect subject compliance to protocol.

          7. Subject is using illegal drugs.

          8. Participating in other clinical study.

          9. Known allergy or hypersensitivity to Nitinol or Nickel or Titanium

         10. For woman: pregnancy or breast feeding.

         11. Known allergy or intolerance for the prescribed antibiotics and in such a case, a
             different antibiotics for which the subject is not allergic or intolerance to, will
             be prescribed.
