TITLE:
      Study Of Angiomax In Infants Under Six Months With Thrombosis
SUMMARY:
      The goals of this study are:

        1. To assess the safety of bivalirudin in infants under six months with arterial or venous
           thrombosis;

        2. To determine the dose of bivalirudin required to achieve adequate anticoagulation as
           measured by the activated clotting time (ACT) or activated partial thromboplastin time
           (aPTT) in Infants Under Six Months with arterial or venous thrombosis;

        3. To determine the outcome of patients on bivalirudin with respect to thrombus resolution
           and bleeding complications compared to patients on unfractionated heparin (UH) or low
           molecular weight heparin (LMWH).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The goals of this study are:

        1. To assess the safety of bivalirudin in infants under six months with arterial or venous
           thrombosis;

        2. To determine the dose of bivalirudin required to achieve adequate anticoagulation as
           measured by the activated clotting time (ACT) or activated partial thromboplastin time
           (aPTT) in Infants Under Six Months with arterial or venous thrombosis;

        3. To determine the outcome of patients on bivalirudin with respect to thrombus resolution
           and bleeding complications compared to patients on unfractionated heparin (UH) or low
           molecular weight heparin (LMWH).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Parent/legal-guardian has provided written informed consent before initiation of any
             study related procedures.

          -  Objectively confirmed thrombotic event by either doppler ultrasound, echocardiogram,
             CT scan, MRI, MR angiogram, MR venogram, venogram or arteriogram.

          -  Age less than 6 months .

          -  Gestational age greater than 35 weeks

          -  Expected life expectancy at least 14 days.

          -  No contraindication to anticoagulation i.e. bleeding complications.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Active or recent (less than 7 days) bleeding.

          -  Known allergy to Angiomax or hirudin, or known sensitivity to any component of the
             product.

          -  Participation in other clinical research studies involving the evaluation of other
             investigational drugs or devices within 30 days of enrollment.

          -  Refusal to undergo blood transfusion should it become necessary.

          -  Any other disease or condition, which, in the judgment of the Investigator would
             place a patient at undue risk by being enrolled in the trial.

          -  Baseline prolonged PT (>18 secs) or aPTT (>55 secs)

          -  Platelet count < 50,000 cells/mm3

          -  Birth Trauma

          -  Planned or indicated surgery within 30 days

          -  Major or minor bleeding event
