TITLE:
      PENELOPE Observational Study
SUMMARY:
      The primary objective of the study is to assess efficacy and safety of different
      prophylactic or therapeutic antithrombotic approaches in patients with hematologic neoplasms
      and platelet count <50 x109/L, including unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin,
      fondaparinux, anti-vitamin K agents, antiplatelet agents, novel oral anticoagulants,
      fibrinolytic agents, with or without a policy of platelet transfusion. Cases with arterial
      or venous thromboembolism managed with observation or use of vena cava filters in patients
      with venous thromboembolism will be included too.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Illness treatment overview The incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE) among patients with
      haematological malignancies has been recently reviewed (1). For patients with lymphoma, the
      incidence of VTE ranged from 1.5 to 14.6% and is 59% in patients with central nervous system
      lymphoma. The incidence of VTE in patients with acute leukaemia varies with time, being
      between 1.4 and 9.6% at diagnosis and between 1.7 and 12% during induction therapy. Notably,
      the highest rates of VTE were reported in patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia, with
      values between 6 and 16% in the largest series. In patients with multiple myeloma who did
      not receive antithrombotic prophylaxis, the rate of VTE increased to 26% in those undergoing
      treatment regimens including immumodulatory drugs (thalidomide and lenalidomide) (1).
      Moreover, in patients who have undergone autologous or allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell
      transplantation (HSCT), the rate of VTE is between 2.9 to 9.9%, and was central venous
      catheter (CVC)-associated in the majority of cases (2-4). VTE has been shown to occur even
      during periods of severe thrombocytopenia; one-third of the events from a patient series
      occurred when the platelet count was <50 x109/L (3). Patients with acute leukaemia have a
      high risk of haemorrhage, mostly related to thrombocytopenia as a result of haematological
      disease and/or chemotherapy, such that the administration of anticoagulant drugs in this
      setting is problematic. No randomised controlled trials have addressed the issue of VTE
      treatment in patients with acute leukaemia, and the management of these cases is based only
      on small groups of patient series or experts' opinion. Five reports have described in detail
      cases of paediatric or adult patients with malignancies and thrombocytopenia who have been
      treated with heparin as a result of a VTE (5-9). Out of a total of 54 cases, 32 had
      haematological malignancies and a platelet nadir <50 x109/L (reviewed in ref. 10). The
      majority of patients (22 of 32) had CVC-related thrombosis. A full dose of low molecular
      weight heparin (LMWH) bid was administered to the majority of the patients with CVC-related
      thrombosis and to the totality of patients for whom the thrombosis was not CVC-related. All
      patients received platelet transfusions if the platelet count fell below <20-40 x109/L, and
      the dose of LMWH was halved when the platelet count was <20 x109/L in one report. None of
      the patients had major bleeding. Rethrombosis occurred in three of 32 (9.3%) patients (6,7).
      In a large series of 379 patients with acute leukaemia, treatment for 20 patients who had
      one (n=16) or two (n= 4) VTE events was essentially based on the administration of
      enoxaparin 100 U/kg bid; in the case of a platelet count <50 x109/L or in the clinical
      suspicion of bleeding risk the dose was reduced to 100 U/kg qd or 50 U/kg bid.
      Alternatively, the patients received a continuous i.v. infusion of unfractionated heparin
      (UFH) to obtain aPTTs in the lower therapeutic range (1.5 times greater than the basal
      value). Secondary prophylaxis after acute VTE was based on the administration of enoxaparin
      100 U/kg qd in the case of ongoing chemotherapy or vitamin K-antagonists (VKA) (INR between
      2 and 3) otherwise. In general, the length of secondary prophylaxis was reported to be not
      longer than six months (11). The safety of therapeutic anticoagulation treatment for the
      management of thrombocytopenic patients was also evaluated in two series of patients
      receiving HSCT (12,13). In 10 patients with multiple myeloma who had received autologous
      HSCT, anticoagulation was required following pre-transplant CVC-related subclavian vein
      thrombosis (n= 8), pulmonary embolism two months prior to transplant (n= 1), or a history of
      acute intermittent atrial fibrillation that was complicated by an arterial embolus to the
      leg (n= 1). Beginning on the first day of high-dose chemotherapy, the 10 patients received
      therapeutic UFH (a 5,000 U i.v. bolus followed by 1,000 U per h) to maintain aPTTs between
      50 and 70 seconds and were switched to VKA treatment when their conditions stabilised. UFH
      treatment was interrupted once the VKA administration produced a therapeutic INR >2 for two
      consecutive days. Heparinised patients received platelet transfusions to maintain counts >30
      x109/L. Three patients developed bleeding (haematuria, haematemesis, mucosal bleeding) that
      did not not require transfusion, and no thrombotic events occurred (12). In another series
      of 26 patients with HSCT who were given enoxaparin for the treatment of VTE, 21 patients had
      haematological malignancies. There were 25 VTE events recorded (four patients had two events
      at different sites) and 11 cases had upper extremity CVC-related deep venous thrombosis.
      During periods of thrombocytopenia (<55 x109/L), enoxaparin administration was reduced to a
      median value of 49 U/kg/day (range 34-75) and was withdrawn in some instances when the
      platelet count fell below 20 x109/L. Two major bleeding events (8%) occurred, in one case
      fatal (13). The aforementioned data are insufficient for the production of evidence-based
      guidelines. Experts and the AIEOP (Associazione Italiana di Ematologia e Oncologia
      Pediatrica) have suggested that the first two weeks of treatment should consist of the
      administration of full-dose LMWH (anti-factor Xa level 0.5-1 U/ml), maintaining the platelet
      count above 50 x109/L. After the first two weeks, halving the dose is recommended if the
      platelet count is between 20 and 50 x109/L. If the platelet count is below 20 x109/L, it is
      advised that the LMWH therapy be discontinued until the platelet count recovers to greater
      than 20 x109/L (14-16). Recent guidelines of the SISET (Società Italiana per lo Studio
      dell'Emostasi e della Trombosi) also suggested that in patients with haematological
      malignancies and VTE LMWH should be preferred over VKA either for the first six months or a
      longer time (17). Arterial thrombosis has been rarely reported in patients with acute
      leukemia as heralding manifestation or complicating the course of disease (18-21). However,
      details concerning antithrombotic treatment and the platelet count at the time of the event
      are lacking in the majority of the reported cases. There have been no published studies
      concerning the use of novel antithrombotic agents such fondaparinux, direct thrombin or
      factor Xa inhibitors, in patients with haematological malignancies or thrombocytopaenia.
      However, in vitro experiments that have been performed on plasma from children with ALL and
      antithrombin deficiency as a result of the administration of asparaginase have demonstrated
      that the direct thrombin inhibitor melagatran generates a consistent anticoagulant response
      that is independent of the antithrombin level. Therefore, this drug class may have important
      potential for use in this field (22).

      Rationale Data about treatment of arterial or venous thromboembolism in patients with
      haematological malignancies and thrombocytopenia are mainly anecdotal. The very limited
      knowledge in this setting does not allow to plan a randomized controlled trial, lacking a
      standard of care and being quite uncertain the benefits and risks of different strategies.
      Therefore we planned an observational study either retrospective and prospective to gain
      information about efficacy and safety of different therapeutic strategies in patients with
      hematologic neoplasms and platelet count <50 x109/L having had diagnosis of arterial or
      venous thromboembolism.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Potential subjects must satisfy all of the following criteria to be enrolled in the study:

          -  diagnosis of hematologic neoplasm (acute leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome,
             lymphoma, multiple myeloma, chronic myeloid leukemia, Ph-negative chronic
             myeloproliferative neoplasms) independently of the stage of disease or treatment
             (including transplant procedures);

          -  platelet count <50 x109/L at the time of starting antithrombotic prophylaxis or

          -  platelet count <50 x109/L at the time of diagnosis of arterial or venous
             thromboembolism objectively proven or

          -  platelet count >50 x109/L at time of thrombosis but subsequent thrombocytopenia <50
             x109/L while receiving antithrombotic treatment;

          -  diagnosis of arterial thrombosis include acute coronary syndrome, ischemic stroke
             (including major and minor stroke), peripheral arterial thrombosis, retinal arterial
             thrombosis;

          -  diagnosis of venous thrombosis include thrombosis of deep veins of the limbs and the
             abdomen, superficial veins of limbs, cerebral and splanchnic veins, retinal vein, and
             pulmonary embolism. Splanchnic venous thrombosis include occlusion of hepatic,
             portal, mesenteric, and splenic veins.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        The following situations will not be criteria of inclusion neither outcomes of interest:

          -  transient ischemic attack without CT and/or NMR signs;

          -  superficial vein thrombosis without Doppler ultrasound examination showing evidence
             of thrombosis;

          -  antithrombotic prophylaxis only local for central venous lines (i.e. CVC flushing
             with heparin);

          -  occlusion of the central venous catheter (notice that CVC-related deep venous
             thrombosis, i.e. thrombosis of the deep veins where the central line is placed, will
             be a criterion of inclusion or an outcome of antithrombotic prophylaxis).
