TITLE:
      AdCh63 ME-TRAP and MVA ME-TRAP Malaria Vaccines Evaluation in Healthy Adults and Children in a Malaria Endemic Area
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this trial is to assess the safety and immunogenicity of MVA ME-TRAP and
      AdCH63 ME-TRAP candidate vaccines in healthy children and adult volunteers in a malaria
      endemic region. The regimen proposed here has protected non-immune volunteers in Oxford
      against sporozoite challenge, and so may be protective against naturally acquired infection
      in The Gambia.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Consenting adult males aged 18-50 years in good health and healthy children aged 2-6
             years.with consenting parents.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Clinically significant history of skin disorder (psoriasis, contact dermatitis etc.),
             allergy, symptomatic immunodeficiency, cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease,
             endocrine disorder, liver disease, renal disease, gastrointestinal disease,
             neurological illness.

          -  Severe malnutrition.

          -  Hypersensitivity to HDCRV.

          -  History of allergic disease or reactions likely to be exacerbated by any component of
             the vaccines, e.g. egg products, Kathon, neomycin, betapropiolactone.

          -  History of splenectomy Haemoglobin less than 9.0 g/dL, where judged to be clinically
             significant in the opinion of the investigator

          -  Serum Creatinine concentration greater than 70 mol/L, where judged to be clinically
             significant in the opinion of the investigator

          -  Serum ALT concentration greater than 45 U/L, where judged to be clinically
             significant in the opinion of the investigator

          -  Blood transfusion within one month of enrolment.

          -  History of vaccination with previous experimental malaria vaccines.

          -  Administration of any other vaccine or immunoglobulin within two weeks before
             vaccination.

          -  Current participation in another clinical trial, or within 12 weeks of this study.

          -  Any other finding which in the opinion of the investigators would increase the risk
             of an adverse outcome from participation in the trial.

          -  Likelihood of travel away from the study area.

          -  HIV positive.

          -  Positive malaria antigen test
