TITLE:
      Phase IIb Clinical Study of Recombinant Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Allergen ESAT6-CFP10
SUMMARY:
      96 TB subjects and 96 non-TB subjects with lung disease who all meet the standard are
      divided into different groups through a randomized, blind methods.Every subject inject
      intradermally ESAT6-CFP10 and TB-PPD in different arms of the same person.Specific γ-
      IFN(gamma interferon) detection is needed before the injection.Evaluate the sensitivity
      (positive coincidence rate) ,the specificity (negative coincidence rate) and the coincidence
      rate of ESAT6-CFP10 in the tuberculosis patients and non-tuberculosis patients with lung
      diseases, and determine the optimal dose of ESAT6-CFP10 for clinical auxiliary diagnosis of
      tuberculosis.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Firstly,96 TB(Tuberculosis ) subjects which meet the standard respectively are divided into
      different groups through a randomized, blind methods.

        1. ESAT6-CFP10 （5μg/ml）in left arm；

        2. ESAT6-CFP10 （5μg/ml）in right arm；

        3. ESAT6-CFP10 （10μg/ml）in left arm；

        4. ESAT6-CFP10 （10μg/ml）in right arm； Inject intradermally ESAT6-CFP10 and
           TB-PPD(tuberculin purified protein derivative ) in different arms of the same
           subject.For each of the participants in this clinical research, this study uniform that
           left arm inject a drug(ESAT6-CFP10 or TB - PPD) first, observe 30 min and no no obvious
           adverse reaction ,then another drug(ESAT6-CFP10 or TB - PPD) inject in right arm. We
           need draw blood to detect specific γ- IFN before the injection.Observe and record the
           vital signs (breathing, heart rate, blood pressure and temperature),the skin reaction
           diameter of injection site (flush and induration) , local reactions (rash, pain,
           itching and skin mucous membrane) and a variety of adverse events.

      Secondly, 96 non-TB subjects with lung disease are divided into different groups and the
      procedure are as the same as 96 TB subjects above .

      Finally,we evaluate the sensitivity (positive coincidence rate) ,the specificity (negative
      coincidence rate) and the coincidence rate of ESAT6-CFP10 in the TB patients and
      non-tuberculosis patients with lung diseases,determine the optimal dose of ESAT6-CFP10 for
      clinical auxiliary diagnosis of tuberculosis,and further evaluate the safety of ESAT6-CFP10
      for the clinical auxiliary diagnosis of tuberculosis .
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria of TB (tuberculosis ) subjects:

          -  Diagnosis TB ;

          -  18 to 65 years ;

          -  Consent and signed informed consent forms(ICF) ;

          -  Comply with follow-up .

        Exclusion Criteria of TB (tuberculosis ) subjects:

          -  advanced cancer, diabetes,copd in acute episodes, acute/ progressive liver disease or
             kidney disease, congestive heart failure, etc ;

          -  Taking part in other clinical or within 3 months involved in any other clinical;

          -  histories of allergy ;

          -  in pregnancy or lactation;

          -  In a mental illness ;

          -  Any conditions affect the trial evaluation.

        Inclusion Criteria of Non-tuberculosis subjects with lung disease :

          -  Diagnosis non-tuberculosis subjects with lung disease ;

          -  18 to 65 years ;

          -  Consent and signed signed informed consent forms(ICF) ;

          -  Comply with follow-up .

        Exclusion Criteria of Non-tuberculosis subjects with lung disease :

          -  advanced cancer, diabetes,copd in acute episodes, acute/ progressive liver disease or
             kidney disease, congestive heart failure, etc ;

          -  Taking part in other clinical or within 3 months involved in any other clinical;

          -  histories of allergy;

          -  in pregnancy or lactation;

          -  In a mental illness ;

          -  Any conditions may affect the trial evaluation.
