TITLE:
      NUCYNTA (Tapentadol Immediate Release) Versus Oxycodone Immediate Release in the Treatment of Acute Low Back Pain
SUMMARY:
      Evaluate how NUCYNTA (tapentadol) immediate release (IR) compares with oxycodone IR in the
      treatment of acute low back pain.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a randomized, outpatient, multicenter, double-blind study (blinded to patient and to
      study doctor) comparing NUCYNTA to oxycodone IR in the treatment of patients with acute (new
      onset) low back pain who also have associated leg pain that radiates (travels down) below
      the knee. Patients will be screened for study eligibility at Visit 1. The study will be
      explained and informed consent will be obtained. Potential patients must satisfy all
      eligibility criteria to be enrolled in the study. Eligible candidates will proceed to the
      Double-Blind Treatment Phase. At the time of study entry, all prohibited medications will be
      discontinued and will be disallowed throughout the study. All patients will call into an
      interactive voice response system (IVRS) to complete a pain assessments twice daily
      throughout the study. Patients who discontinue early for any reason will be instructed to
      contact the study site to complete final assessments, prior to taking supplemental pain
      medication if applicable, and to schedule a final study visit. All patients will return to
      the study site on Day 5 (Visit 2) where they will be evaluated by study personnel and, as
      appropriate, continue with study treatment for an additional 5 days. Patients will return to
      the study site for the final visit on Day 10/End of Study (Visit 3) when they will have all
      final study assessments. The treatment duration will be up to 10 days. The sponsor will
      collect adverse events starting with the signing of the informed consent form. Adverse
      events will be reported by the subject for the duration of the study. Any clinically
      significant abnormalities persisting at the end of the study will be followed by the
      investigator until resolution or until a clinically stable endpoint is reached. Blood
      samples for serum chemistry and hematology and a urine sample for urinalysis will be
      collected. The investigator will review the laboratory report, document this review, and
      record any clinically relevant changes occurring during the study. The following tests will
      be performed by the central laboratory: Urine Pregnancy Testing for women of childbearing
      potential only, Urine Drug Screen, Vital Signs (pulse rate and blood pressure), Physical
      Examination, Neurological Examination, and Vomiting Assessment. The study will be conducted
      at approximately 80 sites in the United States (US). Patients will be randomized to one of
      the two following treatment groups: NUCYNTA 50, 75 or 100 mg every 4 to 6 hours up to 10
      days as needed for pain. Oxycodone IR 5, 10 or 15 mg every 4 to 6 hours as needed for pain.
      Patients will begin treatment on Day 1 with one "lower dose" capsule of study drug (NUCYNTA
      50 mg or oxycodone IR 5 mg). Subsequent dose adjustments will be made by study patients, as
      needed, to achieve a dose that provides a meaningful improvement in their pain intensity
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  At Visit 1 (study entry) patients must have a medical history and physical and
             neurological examinations that support a clinical diagnosis of acute low back pain
             that is felt down to the lower leg below the knee with the onset no longer than 30
             days before Visit 1

          -  At Visit 1 patients must report qualifying pain intensity scores

          -  Patients must be appropriate candidates for treatment with oral opioid pain
             medication in the investigator's clinical judgment

          -  Patients must be able to appropriately verbalize pain characteristics and to complete
             all protocol required measurements/assessments without assistance

          -  Patients must be medically stable on the basis of physical examination, medical
             history, vital signs, and clinical laboratory tests performed at screening

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  History of back (cervical, thoracic or lumbosacral) pain =50% of the time in the 1
             year prior to the first visit

          -  History of any low back pain episode, with the exception of the current acute low
             back pain episode, within 3 months prior to the first visit that was greater than
             mild in pain intensity, or was associated with disability (e.g., loss of time from
             work, family, or activities of daily living), or necessitated the use of an opioid
             (narcotic) analgesic including tramadol

          -  Medical history or physical examination results that suggest the acute low back pain
             or any of the neurological symptoms or signs are caused by a serious medical
             condition (e.g., fever, chills, unexplained weight loss, bowel or urinary bladder
             dysfunction or incontinence, bilateral leg weakness, progressive weakness, paralysis)

          -  There is a high probability for surgical intervention for the back pain during the
             projected time on the study or that there will be an increase in the severity of the
             leg pain or deficits

          -  Had either a surgical procedure involving the spine or intervertebral discs in the
             lower back region within 1 year prior to Visit 1 or had >1 surgical procedure(s)
             involving the spine or intervertebral discs in the lower back region

          -  has any painful condition that could interfere with the study assessments or with the
             patient's ability to differentiate the pain associated with the acute low back pain
             episode from pain associated with another condition

          -  History of severe lumbar spinal stenosis, fibromyalgia, or ankylosing spondylitis

          -  history of epilepsy or recurrent seizures

          -  Unable or unwilling to discontinue all prohibited medications at the time of
             randomization and during the time of their participation in the study

          -  Known or suspected history of alcohol or drug abuse based on medical history,
             physical examination, urine drug screening, or the investigator's clinical judgment

          -  History of cancer malignancy within 2 years prior to the first visit, with the
             exception of basal cell skin carcinoma

          -  Have filed or plan to file a worker's compensation claim for any issue related to the
             current acute low back pain episode

          -  Currently involved in litigation or plan to seek legal recourse for any issue related
             to their acute low back pain

          -  Known allergies, hypersensitivity, or intolerance to tapentadol or the comparator
             (oxycodone) or any excipients used in their manufacture

          -  Had previously been enrolled in a tapentadol clinical study

          -  is pregnant or are breast-feeding
