TITLE:
      Effect of Amlodipine on Anti-platelet Drug Effect in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease
SUMMARY:
      Clopidogrel can reduce risk of cardiovascular disease by inhibiting platelet aggregation. It
      is metabolized to an active drug by a liver enzyme. Its efficacy may be measured by blood
      sampling for platelet activity, analyzed by VerifyNow device. Calcium Channel blocker (CCB)
      is also commonly used for blood pressure and anginal control in these patients.
      Dihydropyridine group of calcium channel blocker (e.g. amlodipine) inhibits this enzyme.
      There are observational studies reporting dihydropyridine CCB reducing clopidogrel effect,
      but the clinical implication is unclear.

      This study test the hypothesis that there is no significant effect of dihydropyridines CCB
      on clopidogrel response compared with control. After giving consent, patients with
      suboptimal blood pressure or anginal control will be randomized to receive either
      dihydropyridine CCB or non-CCB as placebo. These patient will be follow-up in 1 month.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Clopidogrel is a pro-drug, which requires hepatic transformation by the cytochrome P450
      isoform 3A4 to generate the active metabolite. It inhibits adenosine-5-diphosphate
      (ADP)-induced platelet aggregation by irreversibly blocking the platelet P2Y12 receptor.
      However, response to clopidogrel shows wide individual variability, and patients with high
      on-treatment residual ADP-induced platelet reactivity are at an increased risk of adverse
      cardiovascular events. Previous study suggest co-administration of CCBs is associated with
      decreased platelet inhibition by clopidogrel, but these observational studies are confounded
      by patient's characteristics baseline difference such as proportion of hypertension and
      diabetes.

      The objective of this randomized controlled study is to compare amlodipine with placebo on
      anti-platelet effect of clopidogrel.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  ischemic heart disease patient, and

          -  given loading or maintenance dose of clopidogrel and in need of it for 1 or more
             month

          -  and in need of additional drug for optimal BP control (aim blood pressure <130/90) or
             angina control.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  existing use of amlodipine

          -  thrombocytopenia

          -  end stage renal failure

          -  allergy to clopidogrel/ amlodipine

          -  pregnancy/ lactation

          -  strong inhibitor or inducer of cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme within 7 days before start
             of the study.
