TITLE:
      Catheter Thrombectomy in Patients With Massive Pulmonary Embolism
SUMMARY:
      Official Title: Compassionate Use of Catheter Thrombectomy (Aspirex 11F) in Patients With
      Massive Pulmonary Embolism

      Study Population: Patients >/= 18 years of age with massive pulmonary embolism suitable for
      mechanical thrombectomy with Aspirex 11F.

      Treatment: Aspirex 11F assisted thrombectomy

      _________

      The study was terminated early. After having treated seven (7) patients, it was decided in
      April 2007 that the handling characteristics of the test device should be upgraded before
      continuing the trial as planned. Therefore, the study was long-term interrupted and finally
      terminated early. This decision was made by the sponsor in full accordance with the
      principal investigator. Further studies shall be conducted to show effectiveness and safety
      of the Aspirex PE catheter thrombectomy device.

      _________

      Primary Endpoints:

        1. Thrombectomy with the Aspirex catheter device is associated with an immediate decrease
           in mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVP).

        2. The Aspirex thrombectomy catheter does not cause perforation/dissection to treated and
           untreated cardiovascular structures.

      Secondary Endpoints:

        1. Thrombectomy with the Aspirex catheter device is associated with improved flow in the
           treated main and lobar pulmonary arteries as assessed by the angiographic Miller index.

        2. There will be no significant mechanical haemolysis as assessed by plasma free
           haemoglobin levels.

        3. In-hospital mortality will not exceed 20%.

      Study Design: A prospective international multicenter non-randomized registry assessing the
      safety and efficacy of the Aspirex 11F mechanical thrombectomy device.

      Sample Size: Maximum of 50 patients

      Inclusion Criteria:

        -  Patients with massive pulmonary embolism and cardiogenic shock with failed thrombolysis
           or at least contraindication for lysis.

      Exclusion Criteria:

        -  Systemic embolism in the presence of an arterial septal defect or patent foramen ovale.

        -  Free floating right heart thrombi, left heart thrombi.

        -  Life expectancy, due to underlying disease, less than one month.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Official Title: Compassionate Use of Catheter Thrombectomy (Aspirex 11F) in Patients With
      Massive Pulmonary Embolism

      Principal Investigator: Nils Kucher, MD, Cardiovascular Division, Interventional Cardiology,
      Andreas Grüntzig Catheterization Laboratories, Raemistrasse 100 University Hospital Zurich,
      8091 Zurich, Switzerland, Phone: +41 1 255 8762, kuchernils@yahoo.com

      Sponsor: Straub Medical AG, Straubstrasse, 73 23 Wangs, Schweiz

      August 29, 2005

      I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE

      A) Historical Background

      Acute pulmonary embolism (PE) is a potentially life-threatening disease with an overall
      3-month mortality rate that exceeds 15%, with right ventricular (RV) dysfunction as the most
      common cause of death (1). The 30-day mortality rate in patients with massive PE, defined as
      cardiogenic shock or a systemic systolic pressure < 90 mm Hg, exceeds 30%. In patients with
      massive PE, systemic thrombolysis (2) or surgical embolectomy (3-5) in addition to
      anticoagulation may be life-saving, facilitating rapid reversal of RV failure and
      cardiogenic shock. Catheter-directed thrombolysis aims to accelerate clot lysis and achieve
      rapid reperfusion of pulmonary arteries (6). Rapid recanalization of pulmonary arteries by
      thrombolysis (7,8) or embolectomy (4) may improve functional class, decrease the risk of
      recurrence, and prevent chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. However,
      approximately 35% patients are not eligible for thrombolysis because of major
      contraindications, such as recent surgery, trauma, or cancer (9). PE thrombolysis is
      accompanied by a particularly high risk of bleeding complications. Among 304 patients from
      the International Cooperative Pulmonary Embolism registry (ICOPER) who received PE
      thrombolysis, 66 (21.7%) suffered major bleeding and 9 (3.0%) had intracranial bleeding (1).

      Few tertiary care centers offer emergency surgical embolectomy with round-the-clock
      availability (3). This operation mandates a median sternotomy, circulatory arrest with
      cardiopulmonary bypass, and incision of the main pulmonary arteries. In the 2 largest PE
      registries, surgical embolectomy was used in only 1% of patients with massive PE and
      cardiogenic shock.

      The only alternative to thrombolysis or surgical embolectomy for reversing PE-related right
      heart failure and cardiogenic shock is percutaneous catheter thrombectomy (10,11). Catheter
      thrombectomy is particularly important when contraindications to thrombolysis are present or
      when surgical embolectomy is not feasible or not available.

      An ideal percutaneous PE thrombectomy catheter should be: 1) highly maneuverable to allow
      rapid right heart passage and advancement into major pulmonary arteries, 2) effective in
      removing obstructing thrombi from major pulmonary arteries to facilitate rapid improvement
      in hemodynamics, reversing right heart failure and cardiogenic shock, and 3) safe without
      causing damage to cardiac structures and pulmonary arteries, and without causing significant
      blood loss, distal thrombus embolization, and mechanical hemolysis. An ideal PE thrombectomy
      catheter device is currently not available.

      The Greenfield suction embolectomy catheter has been available the longest and is the only
      PE catheter device approved by the Food and Drug Administration (12,13). However, its
      limitations include a very large catheter size, requiring a surgical cutdown at the venous
      puncture site, as well as its stiffness, with difficulty manipulating the catheter to the
      desired location within the pulmonary vascular tree. In addition, there is a substantial
      risk of re-embolization because the aspiration pressure may not be sufficient to hold the
      thrombus in place while removing the catheter with the thrombus trapped within the suction
      cap. Thrombus fragmentation without embolectomy using balloon angioplasty or a pigtail
      rotational catheter has also been reported (15-17). Macroembolization, however, may cause
      further deterioration of hemodynamics when a large centrally located thrombus breaks and
      embolizes into a previously non-obstructed lobar branch (17). Several mechanical or
      rheolytic embolectomy devices, including Angiojet (Possis, Minneapolis, MN), Amplatz "clot
      buster" (BARD-Microvena, White Bear Lake, MN), or Hydrolyser (Cordis, Warren, NJ), were not
      designed for the use in the large-sized main pulmonary arteries but were investigated in
      small PE cohort studies (18-23). These catheter devices have limited efficacy to treat
      massive PE and are plagued by complications that include mechanical hemolysis, and macro- or
      microembolization (23). Mechanical hemolysis occurs when macerated blood or thrombus is not
      removed by the catheter. Transient mechanical hemolysis of 24-48 hours duration was reported
      following catheter thrombectomy, particularly with the Amplatz device and with hydrodynamic
      devices such as the Angiojet catheter (23).

      Catheter thrombectomy is used in only up to 5% of patients with massive PE and cardiogenic
      shock (1). In summary, potentially life-saving therapy, including surgical embolectomy or
      catheter thrombectomy is withheld in up to 30% of patients with massive PE and
      contraindication to thrombolysis.

      B) The Aspirex PE catheter thrombectomy device

      An ideal percutaneous PE thrombectomy catheter should be: 1) highly maneuverable to allow
      rapid right heart passage and advancement into major pulmonary arteries, 2) effective in
      removing obstructing thrombi from major pulmonary arteries to facilitate rapid improvement
      in hemodynamics, reversing right heart failure and cardiogenic shock, and 3) safe without
      causing damage to cardiac structures and pulmonary arteries, and without causing significant
      blood loss, distal thrombus embolization, and mechanical hemolysis. An ideal PE thrombectomy
      catheter device is currently not available.

      The Aspirex catheter thrombectomy device (Straub Medical, Wangs, Switzerland) was
      specifically designed and developed for percutaneous interventional treatment of PE in
      pulmonary arteries, ranging from 6-14 mm in caliber. The central part of the catheter system
      is a high-speed rotational coil within the catheter body that: 1) creates negative pressure
      through an L-shaped aspiration port at the catheter tip, 2) macerates aspirated thrombus,
      and 3) removes macerated thrombus. The aspiration capacity of the Aspirex device was
      adjusted to remove thrombus from obstructed major pulmonary arteries and to minimize the
      risk of vascular collapse and vessel wall engagement. This was achieved by adjusting the
      caliber of the device, the pitch of the rotational coil, motor speed, and size or
      configuration of the aspiration port at the catheter tip.

      Aspirated blood cools off and lubricates the catheter system. The design of the Aspirex
      catheter does not allow recirculation of aspirated blood. In static in-vitro tests using
      human blood samples, aspiration with the Aspirex device was not associated with an increase
      in plasma free hemoglobin (24). Catheter introduction and thrombectomy mandate the use of a
      12-French sheath inserted into the internal jugular or femoral vein. A pigtail or
      balloon-tipped catheter is required to place an exchange guide wire in the pulmonary artery.
      The Aspirex device is then introduced over the wire. An 80-cm 12-French sheath instead of a
      standard size 12-French sheath may be used to: 1) provide more support to introduce the
      Aspirex device into the pulmonary arteries, 2) to monitor right ventricular or pulmonary
      artery pressures, and 3) to inject contrast agent for pulmonary angiography. The distal part
      of the catheter shaft has enhanced flexibility, facilitating right heart passage and
      selective advancement into proximal pulmonary arteries (Table 1).

      Table 1 Technical specifications for the Aspirex PE thrombectomy catheter (24)

        -  Length 120 cm

        -  Maximum external diameter 11 F

        -  Sheath compatibility 12 F

        -  Guide wire compatibility Hydrophilic, 0.035 inch, length 260 cm

        -  Catheter body Polyurethane, stainless steel, perfluoroethylenepropylene

        -  Flexible catheter tip length 41 cm

        -  Motor-catheter connection magnetic clutch with torque lock

        -  Rotary speed 32,500 rpm

        -  Speed torque 25 mNm

        -  Maximum aspiration pressure(*) 11.3 kPA

        -  Minimum catheter bend radius 21 mm (*) measured in a closed static in-vitro system.

      C. In vivo tests

      Pulmonary embolization (24):

      Following general anesthesia, a median cervicotomy was performed to obtain access to jugular
      vessels in 13 pigs (44.5 kg). A 24-French sheath was surgically inserted into the right
      external jugular vein (24); 6-French sheaths were placed into the left external jugular
      vein, left internal jugular vein, and right common carotid artery, respectively. Following
      intravenous administration of 5000 units of unfractionated heparin, 5-French pigtail
      catheters were advanced over a J-tipped 0.035-inch guide wire (Emerald, Cordis, Miami, FL)
      into the ascending aorta and superior vena cava. Two porcine 4-day old thrombi, 5-6 cm in
      length and 1-2 cm in diameter, were injected with 20 ml saline solution through the
      24-French sheath using a tapered adapter 24. The tapered adapter allowed intact injection of
      thrombi through the sheath. A third thrombus was injected in 4 animals because the mean
      aortic pressure remained > 70 mm Hg or the mean pulmonary artery pressure remained < 25 mm
      Hg after injection of 2 thrombi. Total injected thrombus weight was 17.4 g. Of the 13 pigs,
      3 died immediately after thrombus injection due to cardiogenic shock. Ten pigs developed
      cardiogenic shock but nevertheless survived; two required intravenous epinephrine (bolus of
      1 mg) for profound systemic arterial hypotension following thrombus injection.

      Catheter thrombectomy:

      Thrombectomy was initiated immediately after a drop in mean aortic pressure to less than 70
      mm HG or an increase in mean pulmonary artery pressure to > 25 mm Hg were achieved.
      Following embolization, a 260-cm J-tipped exchange wire (Terumo, Leuven, Belgium) was
      advanced via the 24-French sheath into the distal right or left pulmonary artery, passing
      the proximal occlusion site. The thrombectomy catheter was introduced over the exchange
      guide wire and then advanced into a proximal occlusion site. The catheter device was gently
      withdrawn during aspiration. Catheter embolectomy was performed in the main pulmonary
      artery, right and left main and right and left lower lobe pulmonary arteries but not in
      upper lobe pulmonary arteries or segmental branches. Thrombectomy was discontinued as soon
      as the mean aortic pressure increased to > 70 mmHg or the mean pulmonary artery pressure
      decreased to < 25 mmHg, regardless of the angiographic result. In one animal, the right but
      not left embolized lung was left untreated to investigate macroscopic and microscopic
      changes due to embolization; the left lung was treated with the Aspirex catheter.

      Necropsy:

      After en bloc resection of the heart and lungs, all cardiac structures were examined
      macroscopically, including the right atrium, tricuspid valve, right ventricle, and pulmonic
      valve, as well as the main pulmonary artery, right and left pulmonary artery for rupture,
      perforation, dissection, or hemorrhage. Lung specimens were examined macroscopically for
      hemorrhage, edema, or atelectasis. After partial fixation in 4% formaldehyde solution, lung
      specimens were cut transversely into 1-cm sections and evaluated macroscopically for
      perforation and dissection of treated and untreated pulmonary artery segments. After partial
      fixation in 4% formaldehyde solution, lung specimens were cut transversally into 1-cm
      sections and evaluated macroscopically for perforation and dissection of treated and
      untreated pulmonary artery segments. After complete fixation, representative samples (8-10
      per lung) were paraffin-embedded, cut into 3 micrometer sections, and stained with
      hematoxylin-eosin and van Gieson combined with Weigert's method for elastic fiber staining
      (Weigert-van Gieson) for histological evaluation of the vessel wall integrity. The
      microscopic endpoints included perforation, dissection, or hemorrhage of treated vascular
      segments.

      II. SPECIFIC AIMS AND HYPOTHESES

      We will introduce a compassionate use protocol for treating 50 patients with massive PE by
      percutaneous catheter thrombectomy at selected academic hospitals in Switzerland, Germany,
      and the United States, using the Aspirex PE catheter thrombectomy device. We plan to enroll
      a minimum of 10 but no more than 20 patients at the University Hospital of Zurich from
      October 2005 to September 2007.

      Primary endpoints:

        1. Thrombectomy with the Aspirex catheter device is associated with an immediate decrease
           in mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).

        2. The Aspirex thrombectomy catheter does not cause perforation/dissection to treated and
           untreated cardiovascular structures, including the right ventricle, tricuspid and
           pulmonic valve, or the pulmonary arteries, as assessed by pulmonary angiography and
           echocardiography.

      Secondary endpoints:

        1. Thrombectomy with the Aspirex catheter device is associated with improved flow in the
           treated main and lobar pulmonary arteries, as assessed by the angiographic Miller
           index.

        2. There will be no significant mechanical hemolysis as assessed by plasma free hemoglobin
           levels.

        3. In-hospital mortality will not exceed 20%.

      III. SUBJECT SELECTION

      Inclusion Criteria

        1. Patients >=18 years of age with pulmonary embolism and cardiogenic shock, defined as a
           systolic arterial pressure <= 90 mm Hg, a drop in systolic arterial pressure >= 40 mmHg
           for >= 15 minutes, or ongoing administration of catecholamines for systemic arterial
           hypotension

        2. Subtotal or total filling defect in the left and/or right main pulmonary artery due to
           massive PE, as assessed by chest computed tomography or by conventional pulmonary
           angiography

        3. Right ventricular dysfunction on echocardiography: RV systolic hypokinesis and/or RV
           dilation (optional)

        4. Failed thrombolysis or at least one of the following contraindications to PE
           thrombolysis present:

             -  Active bleeding

             -  History of intracranial bleeding

             -  Surgery, delivery, organ biopsy, puncture of a non-compressible vessel within 10
                days

             -  History of stroke

             -  Gastrointestinal bleeding within 10 days

             -  Significant trauma within 15 days

             -  Head injury requiring hospitalization within 1 year

             -  Active cancer with known hemorrhagic risk

             -  Neurosurgery or ophthalmologic surgery within the past year

             -  Platelets <50,000 or INR >2.0

             -  Pregnancy

      Exclusion Criteria

        1. Systemic (paradoxical) embolism in the presence of an atrial septal defect or patent
           foramen ovale

        2. Free floating right heart thrombi, left heart thrombi

        3. Life expectancy due to underlying disease less than one month

      IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT

      Physicians caring for PE patients will be made aware of the compassionate use protocol with
      an announcement at a staff meeting. Physicians will then have the option of informing the
      investigators about potential candidates for the study. The enrollment of a patient in this
      compassionate use protocol requires agreement from: 1) the responsible attending physician,
      and 2) the interventional cardiologist on call, and the cardiovascular surgeon on call.

      Because of the limited prognosis with massive PE, patients cannot provide informed consent
      to participate in this compassionate use protocol. Initially, written informed consent will
      be obtained from a physician not involved in the compassionate use protocol. Physician
      investigators will obtain written informed consent in all patients after completion of the
      PE catheter thrombectomy if the patient is consentable. The patient will be asked to
      participate in study-related procedures, including the measurement of plasma free hemoglobin
      from blood obtained during the procedure, echocardiography 24-72 hours after the procedure,
      and a telephone interview 3-6 months after the procedure.

      V. STUDY PROCEDURES

      The study-related procedures are the following:

        1. measurement of plasma free hemoglobin after completion of the procedure in the
           catheterization laboratory. Five ml blood will be withdrawn from an existing vascular
           access site, without the need for additional venipuncture.

        2. echocardiography 24-72 hours after the procedure to assess recovery of right
           ventricular function.

        3. clinical follow-up by telephone interview 3-6 months after the procedure.

      A) Baseline hemodynamic measurements, pulmonary angiography

        1. Type and cross 2 units of packed red blood cells.

        2. Gain vascular access, preferably the right femoral vein using a standard 12-F sheath.

        3. Perform a manual injection with 5-10 ml of contrast to rule out iliac and inferior vena
           cava thrombosis.

        4. May exchange for an 80-cm 12-F sheath to: 1) provide more support to introduce the
           Aspirex device into the pulmonary arteries, 2) to monitor right ventricular or
           pulmonary artery pressures during thrombectomy, and 3) to inject contrast for pulmonary
           angiography without removing the thrombectomy device from the pulmonary artery.

           Alternatively, the contralateral femoral vein or jugular vein may be accessed to
           advance a diagnostic catheter into the right ventricle or main pulmonary trunk.

        5. Obtain pressure tracings from right atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary artery, and
           oxygen saturation from the right atrium and pulmonary artery. Obtain arterial oxygen
           saturation if arterial sheath in place or document oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry.

        6. Perform pulmonary angiography using digital subtraction angiography (DSA). Cine
           angiography should be used only if the patient is not intubated and cannot hold breath
           for at least 5-8 seconds. The standard Grollman catheter, standard curved pigtail
           catheter, or another angiographic catheter may be used to achieve the desired position
           for pulmonary angiography. Perform a manual injection of 5-10 cc contrast with the
           catheter tip in the pulmonary main trunk to localize emboli in the right or left main
           pulmonary artery. Advance the catheter into the right or left pulmonary artery and
           perform selective angiography in the frontal view using 20 cc of contrast per 2 seconds
           via a power injector. Higher contrast volumes should not be used to avoid worsening of
           right heart failure. The second standard view (45 degree ipsilateral posterior oblique
           view) should be used only when biplane imaging is available. If both main pulmonary
           arteries are to be treated, selective angiography should be performed for both lungs
           separately.

      B) Aspirex PE catheter thrombectomy

        1. Obtain the activated clotting time (ACT) and adjust the heparin dose to achieve an ACT
           between 300 and 350 to avoid malfunction of the thrombectomy device. Bivalirudin
           (Angiox) may be used if the patient has a history of heparin induced thrombocytopenia.

        2. Introduce a 0.035 inch, 260-cm exchange-length J-tipped Terumo wire into the
           angiographic catheter and advance the wire into a distal lobar or proximal segmental
           branch by crossing the occlusion site. Confirm wire position in the main and lobar
           pulmonary arteries using a manual injection of 5-10 ml contrast. Remove the
           angiographic catheter and introduce the Aspirex catheter device over the wire using a
           torquer to hold the Terumo wire in place.

        3. Advance the Aspirex device into the proximal occlusion site. During thrombectomy, the
           Aspirex device should be gently advanced to the distal occlusion site and then pulled
           back while continuing aspiration. During thrombectomy, rotate the Aspirex device gently
           to allow for maximum contact of the L-shaped aspiration port with the thrombus. The
           maximum time for one thrombectomy pass should not exceed 10 seconds to avoid vessel
           wall engagement during aspiration and unnecessary blood loss. Do not advance the
           Aspirex device into segmental arteries to avoid perforation or dissection. Thrombectomy
           should be discontinued as soon as the systemic arterial pressure increases or the
           pulmonary artery pressure decreases, regardless of the angiographic result. The Aspirex
           device should not be used without the Terumo wire.

        4. Several thrombectomy passes may be required to recanalize the main or lobar pulmonary
           arteries and to improve hemodynamics. If both pulmonary arteries need to be treated,
           exchange the Aspirex device for a pigtail, multipurpose catheter, or other angiographic
           catheter to probe the contralateral pulmonary artery with the Terumo wire, and repeat
           step 3.

      C) Post thrombectomy hemodynamic measurements and pulmonary angiography

        1. After completion of thrombectomy, obtain pressure tracings from right atrium, right
           ventricle, pulmonary artery, and oxygen saturation from the right atrium and pulmonary
           artery. Obtain arterial oxygen saturation if arterial sheath in place or document
           oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry.

        2. Perform selective pulmonary angiography of the treated lungs in the frontal view using
           20 cc of contrast per 2 seconds via a power injector. The second standard view (45
           degree ipsilateral posterior oblique view) should be used only if biplane imaging is
           available to avoid unnecessary volume overload.

        3. If an inferior vena cava filter is to be inserted, this must be performed after
           completion of thrombectomy.

      D) Post thrombectomy plasma free hemoglobin level

      Obtain a blood sample from the venous sheath for measurement of plasma free hemoglobin

      E) Echocardiography 24 to72 hours post thrombectomy

      Echocardiography will be performed 24-72 hours after thrombectomy for evaluating right
      ventricular function, right ventricular dilatation, tricuspid and pulmonic valve function,
      and for ruling our pericardial effusion.

      F) Clinical follow-up

      Clinical follow-up will be performed by telephone interview 3-6 months after the procedure.
      The aim is to determine symptoms and survival.

      VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS

      A) Sample size assumptions

      Sample size calculation was based on a study of 20 patients with massive PE in which
      percutaneous catheter intervention was associated with an immediate reduction in mean PAP
      from 31,6 to 28,8 mm Hg (15).

      Estimated sample size for one-sample comparison of mean to hypothesized value (STATA
      Corporation):

      alpha = 0.05 (two-sided) Power (beta) = 90% Baseline mean PAP (mm Hg) = 31 Baseline mean PAP
      standard deviation = 6 Follow-up mean PAP (mm Hg) = 28 Estimated sample size n = 43

      B) Data analysis

      We will perform repeated measures ANOVA tests to compare baseline with follow-up
      measurements, with Bonferroni's adjustment for multiple comparisons. The following
      continuous variables will be compared pre and post thrombectomy: mean PAP, PVR, cardiac
      output, cardiac index, systolic arterial cuff pressure, angiographic Miller index.

      VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS

      Major risks from pulmonary angiography and PE catheter thrombectomy include perforation and
      dissection of cardiovascular structures and of treated or untreated pulmonary arteries, with
      pericardial tamponade, hemothorax, and pulmonary hemorrhage as the most serious
      consequences. The risk of these complications during diagnostic pulmonary angiography is
      less than 0.5% but they may occur more frequently during pulmonary thrombectomy.
      Thrombectomy should only be performed in the main and lobar and not in segmental pulmonary
      arteries to minimize the risk of perforation or dissection. Thrombectomy should be
      terminated as soon as hemodynamic improvement is achieved, regardless of the angiographic
      result. In addition, catheter thrombectomy must be performed with surgical back-up, i.e.,
      with immediate availability of a cardiovascular surgical team and an operating room with
      cardiopulmonary bypass. In case of a perforation, the interventional cardiologist will
      reverse or minimize anticoagulation, insert a pericardial drain, or place a balloon catheter
      to cover the vascular perforation site.

      Injection of contrast agent is required to localize obstructing pulmonary emboli and to
      control the success of the thrombectomy procedure. There is risk of worsening right
      ventricular failure with contrast injection in patients with massive pulmonary embolism. The
      contrast injection volumes and rates must therefore be minimized in patients with
      end-diastolic PAP > 25 mm Hg.

      Other potential complications include arrhythmia, tricuspid or pulmonic regurgitation,
      vascular access complications, including hematoma, pseudoaneurysm, or AV fistula, and
      anaphylactic reaction to iodine contrast. Bleeding may occur at any site from
      anticoagulation with intravenous unfractionated heparin. Renal failure may occur due to the
      use of iodine contrast for pulmonary angiography, particularly in patients with preexisting
      renal dysfunction.

      One disadvantage of the Aspirex device is that blood is extracted during thrombectomy.
      Prolonged aspiration may potentially cause hemodynamic deterioration in patients with
      PE-related shock. In patients with a massive thrombus load, prolonged thrombectomy may be
      required to reverse cardiogenic shock but may result in significant blood loss. In this
      situation, transfusion of 1 or 2 units of packed red blood cells may be necessary.

      Catheter thrombectomy may occasionally be ineffective to remove centrally located pulmonary
      emboli and to reverse cardiogenic shock. Surgical embolectomy should then be considered for
      failed catheter thrombectomy.

      The sponsor of the study, Straub Medical AG, Wangs, Switzerland has contracted an insurance
      to cover costs for device-related damage or death. Since the mortality from massive PE is
      exceedingly high and patients may die despite a technically successful procedure, the
      insurance will not cover events that are not related to device-related damage.

      VIII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS

      Catheter thrombectomy to treat massive PE can rapidly reverse acute right ventricular
      failure and cardiogenic shock and therefore is potentially life-saving. Catheter
      thrombectomy represents the only reperfusion strategy when contraindications to thrombolysis
      are present or when surgical embolectomy is not feasible or not readily available. In
      addition, catheter thrombectomy is a minimally invasive interventional therapy without the
      need for cardiopulmonary bypass in the setting of the failing right ventricle. If no
      reperfusion therapy, including thrombolysis, catheter thrombectomy, or surgical embolectomy
      in addition to anticoagulation is initiated, the risk of death during hospitalization in
      patients with massive PE exceeds 30% (7,10).

      Standard therapy with thrombolysis is associated with an increased risk of major hemorrhage,
      and intracranial hemorrhage was reported in up to 3% of the patients with massive PE (1). In
      comparison to thrombolysis, catheter thrombectomy causes fewer systemic bleeding
      complications, including the most serious complication of intracranial hemorrhage.

      IX. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE

      The Adverse Event Report Form (AERF) must be completed by the Site Investigator or a
      licensed Physician Coinvestigator and faxed to:

        1. the Sponsor (Straub Medical AG), and

        2. the local ethics committee within 24 hours after the occurrence of the event.

      The Sponsor will forward the AERF immediately to:

        1. the Principal Investigator,

        2. SWISSMEDIC, and

        3. the Data Safety Monitoring Officer (DSMO).

      X. DATA SAFETY MONITORING OFFICER (DSMO)

      Prof. Stavros Konstandinides, University Hospital Göttingen, is a pulmonary embolism expert
      who will serve as Data Safety Monitoring Officer (DSMO). The Sponsor is responsible for
      reporting any adverse events to the DSMO as described above. In addition, safety endpoints
      will be reviewed by the DSMO after each 10 enrolled patients. The DSMO can suggest to
      terminate the study prematurely based on concerns about patient safety.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Patients >= 18 years of age with pulmonary embolism and cardiogenic shock, defined as
             a systolic arterial pressure <= 90 mmHg, a drop in systolic arterial pressure >= 40
             mmHg for >= 15 minutes, or ongoing administration of catecholamines for systemic
             arterial hypotension

          2. Subtotal or total filling defect in the left and/or right main pulmonary artery due
             to massive PE, as assessed by chest computed tomography or by conventional pulmonary
             angiography

          3. Right ventricular dysfunction on echocardiography: RV systolic hypokinesis and/or RV
             dilation (optional)

          4. Failed thrombolysis or at least one of the following contraindications to PE
             thrombolysis present:

               -  Active bleeding

               -  History of intracranial bleeding

               -  Surgery, delivery, organ biopsy, puncture of a non-compressible vessel within 10
                  days

               -  History of stroke

               -  Gastrointestinal bleeding within 10 days

               -  Significant trauma within 15 days

               -  Head injury requiring hospitalization within 1 year

               -  Active cancer with known hemorrhagic risk

               -  Neurosurgery or ophthalmologic surgery within the past year

               -  Platelets < 50,000 or INR >2.0

               -  Pregnancy

        Exclusion Criteria

          1. Systemic (paradoxical) embolism in the presence of an atrial septal defect or patent
             foramen ovale

          2. Free floating right heart thrombi, left heart thrombi

          3. Life expectancy due to underlying disease less than one month
