TITLE:
      Positive Action for Today's Health
SUMMARY:
      Regular moderate and vigorous intensity physical activity (PA) is inversely related with
      obesity, however, few adults are successful in incorporating sufficient PA into their daily
      lives. Minority and lower-income adults have among the highest obesity rates and lowest
      levels of regular PA. Increasing environmental supports for safe and convenient places for
      PA is an emerging public health strategy for PA interventions. Preliminary data by Wilson
      (PI) and colleagues has revealed through focus groups that low-income minority adults would
      like to increase the safe places for PA (areas free from crime, containment of stray dogs,
      increased police patrol) and access to PA (sidewalks/trails and expand opportunities for PA)
      in their community. In addition, the results of the investigators' preliminary studies
      suggest that African Americans had psychosocial barriers to PA that included lack of
      self-motivation, cultural body image issues, and lack of time due to family obligations. The
      present proposal is innovative in that it specifically tests the efficacy of an intervention
      that includes both patrolled-walking and social marketing elements to increase PA in
      low-income African Americans. Three communities will be randomized to receive one of three
      programs: a police patrolled-walking program plus social marketing intervention, a police
      patrolled-walking only intervention, or no walking intervention (general health education
      only; N=390; 130/group). The 24-month intervention will focus on increasing safety (training
      community leaders to serve as walking captains, hiring off-duty police officers to patrol
      the walking program, and containing stray dogs), increasing access for PA (marking a walking
      route), and will include a tailored social marketing campaign for increasing PA (in one
      intervention community). The investigators will collect data for PA (7-day accelerometer
      estimates, 4-week PA history), body composition, blood pressure, psychosocial measures, and
      perceptions of environmental supports for safety and access for PA at baseline, 6-,12-,18-,
      and 24-months. The primary hypotheses are that the patrolled-walking plus social marketing
      intervention will result in greater increases in moderate and vigorous PA as compared to a
      patrolled walking only intervention or no-intervention by 12-months and that these effects
      will be maintained at 18-month and 24-month assessments.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  African American (3 of 4 grandparents are of African Descent)

          -  Lives in designated census area

          -  No plans to move in the next two years

          -  Has no medical condition that would limit participation in moderate intensity
             exercise including life-threatening illness (e.g., immobile, severely disabled, or
             bed ridden)

          -  Available and able to participate in measures and intervention activities over the
             next 2 years

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Extreme Blood Pressure and/or Blood Glucose levels

          -  Unable to take a brisk, 30-minute walk
