TITLE:
      PCI and Renal Denervation in Hypertensive Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes
SUMMARY:
      Research hypothesis:

      Is the treatment with renal denervation (RDN) early post ACS safe and effective and does it
      leads to improved cardiac function and attenuation of pathologic left ventricular
      remodelling? In a following study, the hypothesis will be tested in a larger ACS population
      with major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) after ACS as the endpoint.

      Rationale for conducting this study:

      ACS i.e. ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and non- ST-elevation myocardial
      infarction (non-STEMI) are the most important causes of morbidity and mortality in western
      societies. Hypertension is a major risk factor for development of ACS and heart failure but
      it also worsens the prognosis in patients after ACS. Our research highlights the combination
      therapy of PCI and RDN in an ACS patient population with simultaneous hypertension.

      Primary objective:

      The primary objective of this study is to establish safety and efficacy of combined
      treatment with PCI and renal denervation (RDN) in hypertensive patients with acute coronary
      syndromes (STEMI and non-STEMI ) having ventricular mass after 4 months as the primary
      variable.

      Endpoints:

      The primary end point is change in left ventricular mass (LVM) at 4 months evaluated by
      magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

      Secondary endpoints:, blood pressure (office and 24-h ABPM), and left ventricular volumes
      and ejection fraction.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The sympathetic nervous system plays a crucial role in the development and progression of
      hypertension and its adverse consequences. Despite the availability of numerous effective
      pharmacologic treatments, adequate blood pressure control is not achieved in a large number
      of subjects. Patients with essential hypertension generally have increased efferent
      sympathetic drive to the kidneys and an increased rate of sympathetic-nerve firing, possibly
      modulated by afferent signalling from renal sensory nerves. Recently developed endovascular
      catheter technology enables selective denervation of the human kidney. A safety and
      feasibility trial of this procedure identified substantial reductions of blood pressure
      without substantial procedure-related complications. The therapeutic value seems to be
      present not only in hypertension but may also be of interest in many clinical conditions
      e.g. heart failure, chronic end-stage renal disease and insulin resistance and diabetes.

      The present study (COMBI-RDN) is a randomised clinical trial in 40 patients to investigate
      safety and efficacy of the combination of Percutan Coronar Interventiom (PCI) and renal
      denervation (RDN) where RDN is performed early after acute coronary syndrome (ACS). This
      study is considered a pilot study to evaluate efficacy and safety in patients with ACS. In a
      second phase there will be a randomised, multicenter study in approximately 2500 patients to
      demonstrate whether RDN early post ACS could decrease major adverse cardiovascular events in
      hypertensive patients with ACS.

      Research hypothesis Is the treatment with renal denervation (RDN) early post ACS safe and
      effective and does it leads to improved cardiac function and attenuation of pathologic left
      ventricular remodelling?
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Provision of informed consent prior to any study specific procedures

          2. Female and/or male aged 18-80 years

          3. Patients with ACS, i.e. STEMI, non-STEMI, treated with PCI

          4. Medical history of treated (ongoing) hypertension, or hypertension discovered at the
             time of ACS, and office SBP >140 despite treatment with three antihypertensive drugs.

          5. Ejection fraction >40%.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Increased risk of pathological bleedings

          2. Office systolic blood pressure <120

          3. Renal artery abnormalities.

          4. eGFR <30 mL/min

          5. ICD or pacemaker, or any other metallic implant not compatible with MRI

          6. Estimated survival time <1 year

          7. Not oriented to person, place and time

          8. Inability to understand given information about the study

          9. Fertile female
