TITLE:
      Thyroxine Titration Study
SUMMARY:
      The aim of the study is to examine the effects of fine titration of thyroxine dosage on
      symptoms of hypothyroidism, wellbeing and quality of life. The hypothesis is that symptoms
      of hypothyroidism, wellbeing and quality of life will be improved in thyroxine-treated
      subjects when serum thyrotropin (TSH) is suppressed and/or in the lower reference range,
      compared to when TSH is in the upper reference range.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Primary hypothyroidism is a common disorder, affecting 2% of the Australian population. The
      standard treatment is with thyroxine (T4), and conventionally, a serum thyrotropin (TSH)
      concentration within the laboratory range is taken as indicating adequacy of thyroxine
      dosage.

      Some patients with hypothyroidism complain of persistently impaired well-being, despite
      taking thyroxine in a dose which normalises serum TSH concentrations. It is not clear
      whether this is because of comorbidity or because standard thyroxine replacement is in some
      way inadequate for some individuals.

      The reference range for serum TSH is wide (currently 0.34-4.8 mU/L at PathCentre). The
      distribution of serum TSH concentrations in the population is skewed, with the mean and
      median in the lower reference range at approximately 1.0 mU/L. This has led some to argue
      that a serum TSH in the lower reference range should be the usual therapeutic target.
      Anecdotal evidence suggests that some thyroxine-treated patients do feel better if the
      thyroxine dose is adjusted so that serum TSH is in the lower reference range rather than the
      upper reference range. The National Academy for Clinical Biochemistry of the United States
      now recommends, that for thyroxine-treated patients, that serum TSH should be less than 2.0
      mU/L. There is, however, no evidence from properly conducted studies that aiming for a serum
      TSH concentration in the lower reference range improves symptoms of hypothyroidism or
      general wellbeing, and this proposal has not been generally adopted.

      Only one study examining the effects of fine titration of thyroxine dosage on wellbeing has
      been published. In this study, patients had significantly improved wellbeing if they took a
      dose of thyroxine which was 50 μg greater than their biochemically optimal dose as
      determined by a thyrotropin-releasing hormone test. In most cases, serum TSH was suppressed
      to below 0.2 mU/L (the limit of sensitivity of the assay) on the thyroxine doses which
      improved wellbeing. This study was open-label and non-randomised, and the results therefore
      may have been affected by bias.

      A well-designed, double blind study of the effects of fine titration of thyroxine dosage on
      symptoms of hypothyroidism, wellbeing and quality of life is required to determine if a
      serum TSH in the lower reference range, rather than simply TSH within the reference range,
      should indeed be the usual therapeutic target for thyroxine therapy in primary
      hypothyroidism. It is also desirable to confirm the findings of Carr et al., that patients
      have improved wellbeing if TSH is suppressed to below normal levels.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Male or female subjects >18 years of age

          -  Primary hypothyroidism ≥6 months duration arising from autoimmune hypothyroidism,
             thyroidectomy or radioiodine treatment

          -  Thyroxine dose ≥100 mcg/day

          -  No change in thyroxine dose in past 2 months

          -  Serum TSH of 0.1-4.8 mU/L

          -  Adequate contraceptive measures for women of childbearing age

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Major systemic illness affecting quality of life or likely to affect participation in
             the study

          -  Treatment with T3 currently or in past 2 months

          -  History of thyroid cancer requiring suppression of TSH secretion by thyroxine

          -  Ischaemic heart disease – previous myocardial infarction, angina or coronary artery
             revascularisation

          -  Renal failure: serum creatinine >135 micromol/L

          -  Known liver disease with alkaline phosphatase or ALT >2x upper limit of reference
             range

          -  Bony fracture in past 3 months or Paget’s disease of bone

          -  Secondary (central) hypothyroidism or hypopituitarism
