TITLE:
      Study to Investigate the Tolerability, Safety, Pharmacokinetics, and Pharmacodynamics of ACT-389949
SUMMARY:
      This is a prospective, single-center, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled,
      ascending single oral dose and food interaction Phase 1 study. It will evaluate the safety,
      tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of ascending single oral doses of
      ACT-389949 in healthy male subjects. It will also investigate the effect of food on the
      pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerability of a single dose of ACT-389949.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Signed informed consent prior to any study-mandated procedure.

          -  Healthy Caucasian male subjects aged between 18 and 45 years (inclusive) at
             screening.

          -  Subjects must agree to use reliable methods of contraception.

          -  No clinically significant findings on physical examination at screening.

          -  Body mass index (BMI) between 18.0 and 30.0 kg/m^2 (inclusive) at screening.

          -  Systolic blood pressure (SBP) 100-145 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) 50-90
             mmHg, and pulse rate (PR) 45-90 bpm (inclusive) measured at screening.

          -  12-lead ECG without clinically relevant abnormalities, measured at screening.

          -  Body temperature (T°) 35.5-37.5°C at screening and prior to (first) dosing.

          -  Total and differential white blood cell (WBC) count strictly within the normal ranges
             at screening and on Day −1.

          -  C-reactive protein (CRP) levels below 5 mg/L.

          -  Hematology and clinical chemistry results (other than total and differential WBC
             count and CRP) not deviating from the normal range to a clinically relevant extent at
             screening.

          -  Coagulation and urinalysis test results not deviating from the normal range to a
             clinically relevant extent at screening.

          -  Non smokers, defined as never smoked or achieved cessation for ≥ 6 months at
             screening.

          -  Negative results from urine drug screen at screening.

          -  Subjects allowing the conduct of genetic analyses on whole blood consisting of
             measuring the levels of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression of mechanistic
             biomarkers of N-formyl-peptide receptor 2 (FPR2) and proteins involved in
             inflammation.

          -  Ability to communicate well with the investigator in the local language, and to
             understand and comply with the requirements of the study.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Known allergic reactions or hypersensitivity to any excipient of the drug
             formulation.

          -  History or clinical evidence of any disease, and/or existence of any surgical or
             medical condition, which might interfere with the absorption, distribution,
             metabolism or excretion of the study drug.

          -  Previous history of recurrent fainting, collapses, syncope, orthostatic hypotension,
             or vasovagal reactions.

          -  Veins unsuitable for intravenous (i.v.) puncture on either arm.

          -  Treatment with another investigational drug within 3 months prior to screening or
             having participated in more than four investigational drug studies within 1 year
             prior to screening.

          -  History or clinical evidence of alcoholism or drug abuse within the 3-year period
             prior to screening.

          -  Excessive caffeine consumption.

          -  Treatment with any prescribed or over-the-counter (OTC) medications within 2 weeks
             prior to (first) study drug administration or five half-lives of the medication,
             whichever is longer.

          -  Any history of immunosuppressive treatment.

          -  Chronic diseases including those with recurring periods of flare-ups and remission.

          -  History of atopic allergy (including asthma, urticaria, eczematous dermatitis).

          -  Signs of infection (viral, systemic fungal, bacterial or protozoal) within 4 weeks
             prior to (first) study drug administration.

          -  History of acute or chronic obstructive lung disease (treated or not treated).

          -  History of subarachnoid hemorrhage or hemolytic uremic syndrome.

          -  Interval from the beginning of the P wave to the beginning of the QRS complex (PQ/PR
             interval) < 120 ms at screening.

          -  Loss of 250 mL or more of blood, or an equivalent amount of plasma, within 3 months
             prior to screening.

          -  Positive results from the hepatitis serology, except for vaccinated subjects or
             subjects with past but resolved hepatitis, at screening.

          -  Positive results from the human immunodeficiency virus serology at screening.

          -  Any circumstances or conditions, which, in the opinion of the investigator, may
             affect full participation in the study or compliance with the protocol.

          -  Legal incapacity or limited legal capacity at screening.
