TITLE:
      Changes in Skin Conductance Measurement as an Endpoint Monitor for Sympathetic Blocks
SUMMARY:
      This study is intended to evaluate a monitor that will facilitate ascertainment of an
      effective sympathetic blockade following Lumbar Sympathetic blocks. Utilization of a monitor
      with a rapid response and easy clinical applicability which can demonstrate effective
      sympathetic block would increase efficiency within the procedure suite and also serve to
      function as an objective endpoint for the evaluation of sympathetic blockade in future
      research.In current clinical practice, the most commonly used monitoring methods are
      clinical observations of sympathetic blockade, skin temperature monitoring, pulse pressure
      monitoring and any combination of these monitoring methods. The skin temperature and pulse
      pressure may increase after sympathetic block. However, changes in the skin temperature and
      pulse pressure often demonstrate an unpredictable or delayed response. Confounding
      variables, such as ambient temperature, coexisting vascular disease, use of other vasoactive
      medications may contribute to inconsistencies in the temperature or pulse pressure
      responses.

      Normal sympathetic activity stimulates muscarinic receptors in the periphery that
      subsequently stimulate the sweat glands to secrete and fill with sweat containing sodium and
      other electrolytes. The electrolytes present in the sweat increase the electrical
      conductance while decreasing the electrical resistance at the skin level.

      The real-time changes in skin conductance indices can be monitored at the skin level, by use
      of non-invasive electrodes attached to the skin (similar to EKG electrodes). A computer
      program analyzes the data and produces a real-time graphic and numeric data demonstrating
      the skin conductance response. The initiation of successful sympathetic blockade can cause
      rapid cessation of the skin sympathetic activity that leads to a decrease in skin
      conductance within seconds.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients presenting for sympathetic block of the lower extremity (lumbar sympathetic
             block)

          -  Ages 18-99

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with pacemakers or cardiac defibrillators

          -  Age <18

          -  IV sedation for anxiolysis or analgesia

          -  Burn patients or patients with severe dermatologic conditions (as defined by skin
             conditions causing further pain to patients that actively has to be treated)

          -  Allergy to adhesive tape

          -  Patient with diagnosis of: Dysautonomia, Sympathetic dysfunction (e.g.,Raynaud
             disease, Buerger disease) or Disorders of sweating (e.g.,Acquired idiopathic
             generalized anhidrosis)

          -  Patients on vasoactive drugs
