TITLE:
      Effectiveness of the Compression Belt for Patients With Sacroiliac Joint Pain
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this randomized clinical trial is to examine the usefulness of the addition
      of a pelvic compression belt to a lumbopelvic stabilization program for patients with
      sacroiliac joint pain by comparing lumbopelvic stabilization exercises with a pelvic
      compression belt to lumbopelvic stabilization exercises alone. Outcome measures including
      the Modified Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Index (OSW), the percentage change of TrA and
      IO muscle thickness (i.e. muscle contraction from rest to contract) utilizing ultrasound
      imaging, the Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) for pain, and a subjective rating of overall
      perceived improvement using the Global Rating of Change (GROC) scale will be collected.
      Hypothesis: The OSW scores and NPRS scores will be lower for those who receive the
      compression belt in addition to the lumbopelvic stabilization program as compared to those
      who receive the lumbopelvic stabilization alone. The percent change of muscle thickness for
      the deep abdominals as well as the GROC scores will be higher for those who receive the
      compression belt in addition to the lumbopelvic stabilization program as compared to those
      who receive the lumbopelvic stabilization alone.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background: The estimated prevalence of sacroiliac joint (SIJ) pain is approximately 13-30%
      in patients with non-specific low back pain. One common presentation for those with SIJ pain
      is unilateral pain over the SIJ region, which is described as a positive Fortin's sign.
      Common impairments for this population include pelvic asymmetry, lumbopelvic muscle
      imbalance, and decreased lumbopelvic proprioceptive awareness and stability. Two common
      physical therapy interventions for this population are lumbopelvic stabilization programs
      and pelvic compression belts. The purpose of this randomized clinical trial is to examine
      the usefulness of the addition of a pelvic compression belt to a lumbopelvic stabilization
      program for patients with sacroiliac joint pain by comparing lumbopelvic stabilization
      exercises with a pelvic compression belt to lumbopelvic stabilization exercises alone.
      Participants: Thirty participants with unilateral pain near the SIJ will be recruited for
      the study and randomly assigned to 1 of 2 treatment groups (stabilization plus belt or
      stabilization alone). Both groups will receive a lumbopelvic stabilization program for 12
      weeks. The stabilization plus belt group will also receive a pelvic compression belt to be
      worn continuously for the first 4 weeks. Outcome measures including the Modified Oswestry
      Low Back Pain Disability Index (OSW), the percentage change of TrA and IO muscle thickness
      (i.e. muscle contraction from rest to contract) utilizing ultrasound imaging, the Numeric
      Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) for pain, and a subjective rating of overall perceived improvement
      using the Global Rating of Change (GROC) scale will be collected. These outcomes will be
      assessed at baseline, 4 weeks, and 3 months post-intervention. Hypothesis: The OSW scores
      and NPRS scores will be lower for those who receive the compression belt in addition to the
      lumbopelvic stabilization program as compared to those who receive the lumbopelvic
      stabilization alone. The percent change of muscle thickness for the deep abdominals as well
      as the GROC scores will be higher for those who receive the compression belt in addition to
      the lumbopelvic stabilization program as compared to those who receive the lumbopelvic
      stabilization alone. Data Analysis: Two separate ANOVAs (group x time) with repeated
      measures will be used to examine the effect of the interventions on disability and the
      percent change of muscle thickness. Whitney U-test will be used to analyze the NPRS data,
      and descriptive statistics will be used to report the GROC scores. Clinical Relevance: The
      results of the study may provide evidence in prescribing pelvic compression belt for those
      with SIJ pain. It will also offer guidance as to how and when pelvic compression belts
      should be used in this population. Finally, it will guide physical therapists in prescribing
      effective interventions for those with SIJ pain.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  unilateral pain near the sacroiliac joint that does not extend pass the knee

          -  positive result on 2 of 6 sacroiliac joint provocation tests:

               -  compression test

               -  distraction test

               -  posterior shear test

               -  Gaenslens' test (left and right)

               -  sacral thrust test

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  current pregnancy or pregnancy in the last 6 months

          -  history of surgery to lumbar spine, pelvis, chest, abdomen

          -  history of congenital lumbar or pelvic anomalies

          -  any neurological signs in the lower extremity
