TITLE:
      Phase I Trial of Inhaled Nitric Oxide to Treat Acute Pulmonary Embolism
SUMMARY:
      This study will test the hypothesis that patients with acute PE and dyspnea can safely
      inhale NO. The secondary hypothesis is that patients who are blinded to the inhaled NO
      concentration will sustain subjective improvement in their perception of dyspnea based upon
      their reported Borg dyspnea score, during inhalation of NO.

      Specific aims

        1. Test if patients with acute PE and shortness of breath of severity ≥ 5 on a 0-10 scale
           called the Borg score can have inhaled nitric oxide administered via nasal cannula or
           face mask in a titration protocol that increases concentration by 5 ppm in 5 min steps
           to a maximum of 25 ppm.

        2. We will measure the number of patients who meet an absolute safety endpoint during
           titration. An absolute safety endpoint requires execution of a rapid weaning protocol
           (2 ppm decrease per minute to 0 ppm).

           Absolute safety endpoints: Two consecutive SBP measurements more than one min apart
           with both readings < 80 mm Hg;SaO 2 <80% for more than 15 seconds; Patient
           deterioration as defined by: Clinical decision for need of inotropic or pressor support
           for any reason, seizure, new altered mental status, focal neurological signs suggestive
           of cerebral ischemia, evidence of myocardial ischemia, protracted vomiting.

        3. Test if the patient-reported Borg score decreases with administration of NO. Patients
           will not be told any details about the timing of the titration and will not be made
           aware of their iNO concentration when the Borg score is assessed.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      We propose to enroll a total of 25 patients with recently diagnosed pulmonary embolism.
      Inclusion criteria will include moderate to severe shortness of breath as rated by the
      patient on a standard scoring system, a systolic blood pressure of >89 mm Hg unless the
      patient has a known prior history of low blood pressure, and blood oxygen saturation of
      >80%. Exclusion criteria will include: altered mental status, inability to use a nasal
      cannula, a large need for supplemental oxygen, pregnancy, pneumothorax, recent use of
      nitrate-containing medications, recent use of thrombolytic drugs, requirement for inotropic
      or pressor support, or a level of methemoglobin greater than 10%.

      After obtaining informed consent, subjects will have blood drawn and vital signs will be
      obtained. They will subsequently begin to breathe oxygen and NO supplied through a nasal
      cannula delivered from the iNOvent device. The patients will undergo serial measurements of
      their blood pressure, arterial oxygen saturation and will have their serum methemoglobin
      level monitored via a non-invasive probe. Titration of the amount of NO delivered will be
      made periodically based on the patient's vital signs. If an absolute safety endpoint is
      reached, NO will be rapidly weaned. Based on the patient's response to NO as determined by
      their vital signs, a maintenance dose of NO, not to exceed 25 ppm, will be reached. Subjects
      will continue to receive this concentration for up to 2 hours prior to weaning. Patients
      will be asked once more to rate the severity of their shortness of breath and blood will be
      drawn just prior to weaning. Should the patient reach a safety endpoint, the NO will be
      weaned at an earlier timepoint.

      We will determine the percentage of patients able to complete the full protocol without
      reaching a safety endpoint, the percent change in methemoglobin level, the trend in
      patient-reported shortness of breath, percent change in SBP and oxygen saturation and the
      number of patients who withdraw during induction for any reason.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Diagnosis of acute PE requires symptoms of PE present <14 days with CT angiography
             interpreted as positive for acute PE. Initial evaluation for PE must be predicated
             upon the investigation of new or unexplained cardiopulmonary or chest-related
             clinical features consistent with PE, including shortness of breath, chest pain,
             respiratory distress, dizziness, unexplained tachypnea, tachycardia, syncope, cough
             or hemoptysis. All patients must have CT chest angiography with <2 mm
             collimation,(36) with or without indirect venography. Pulmonary arterial
             opacification will be achieved with power injection of non-ionic, low osmolar
             contrast in an antecubital vein with a timing run; the pitch, voltage, gantry speed
             and other technical details appropriate for each scanner.(37;38) Images will be
             interpreted as positive for intrapulmonary arterial filling defect consistent with
             acute PE using our published definitions(37;38) by a board-certified radiologist with
             specialty training in body CT or emergency medicine imaging in all cases.

          2. SBP (SBP)> 89 mm Hg at the time of enrollment. We will allow enrollment for a patient
             with an SBP < 90 mm Hg prior to enrollment, or a patient with a SBP>80 mm Hg, if the
             patient has a documented or patient-identified history of low blood pressure and has
             no symptoms of shock, as described by Jones et al.(39)

          3. SaO2% >80% at time of enrollment.

          4. Patients must have a Borg score greater than 4/10.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Altered mental status such that they are unable to provide consent.

          2. Inability to use a nasal cannula or face mask (e.g., anatomic defect)

          3. Supplemental oxygen requirement greater than can be administered via nasal cannula or
             face mask in order to maintain SaO2 >80%.

          4. Pregnancy

          5. Pneumothorax with decompression

          6. A serum mtHb greater than 10%

          7. Concurrent therapies including:

               1. Viagra® (sildenafil) use within the past 24 hours

               2. Levitra® (vardenafil) use within the past 24 hours

               3. Cialis® (tadalafil) use within the past 72 hours

               4. Use nitroprusside or nitroglycerine with in the past 4 hours

               5. Concomitant use of pressor or inotropic agents

               6. Use of fibrinolytic agent with in the past 14 days

               7. Use of nitrates within the past 24 hours
