TITLE:
      Thyroid Hormones Treatment in Asthma Exacerbation
SUMMARY:
      This study will explore whether supplementation with thyroid hormones in the set-up of
      asthma exacerbation could improve the clinical outcomes.

      The study will include adults admitted to Rambam health care campus for moderate to severe
      Asthma exacerbation.

      The study is a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial.
      Patients will be randomized on admission to receive treatment with intra-venous thyroxine
      (100mcg once on admission and additional 100mcg after 12 hours) or placebo. The study
      treatment will be given only after the initial bronchodilator therapy, oxygen and informed
      consent are given. The primary endpoint is the time to return of the peak expiratory flow
      (PEF) rate to normal values or personal base line.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Study population: The study will include adults admitted to Internal Medicine B (IMB)
      department, Internal Medicine H (IMH) department or medical intensive care unit (MICU) in
      Rambam-Health Care Campus for moderate to severe Asthma exacerbation. The severity of the
      exacerbation will be based on several acceptable clinical and laboratory criteria, including
      breathless, alertness, pulse rate, respiratory rate, partial pressure of oxygen in arterial
      blood (PaO2), partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2), oxygen
      saturation, peak expiratory flow (PEF). Study protocol: The study is a prospective,
      randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial. Patients will be randomized on
      admission to receive treatment with intra-venous thyroxine (100mcg once on admission and
      additional 100mcg after 12 hours) or placebo. The study treatment will be given only after
      the initial bronchodilator therapy, oxygen and informed consent are given. The primary
      endpoint is the time to return of the PEF rate to normal values or personal base line. PEF
      rates will be examined first after initial bronchodilator therapy and then, every 8 hours.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  18 years of age or older

          -  Known Asthma

          -  The exacerbation is defined as moderate or severe.

          -  Not currently enrolled as an active participant in another clinical trial of a
             medical therapy or device.

          -  The patient or first degree family relative (in cases where the patient is intubated)
             has authorized his/her consent to participate in this trial. The patient will be
             asked to give his consent only after initial bronchodilator therapy

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  60 years of age or older

          -  Known thyroid disorders

          -  Subject where thyrotoxicosis is suspected

          -  Known heart disease

          -  Heart rate > 140
