TITLE:
      Ibuprofen or Morphine in Treating Pain in Patients Undergoing Pleurodesis for Malignant Pleural Effusion
SUMMARY:
      RATIONALE: Morphine and ibuprofen help lessen pain caused by pleurodesis. It is not yet
      known whether one drug is more effective than the other in lessening pleurodesis-related
      pain or whether the size of the chest drain tube affects pain.

      PURPOSE: This randomized clinical trial is studying ibuprofen to see how well it works
      compared with morphine in treating pain in patients undergoing pleurodesis for malignant
      pleural effusion.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      OBJECTIVES:

      Primary

        -  To evaluate the efficacy of a non-steroidal based regimen comprising ibuprofen in
           decreasing post-pleurodesis pain as compared to an opiate-based regimen comprising
           morphine sulfate in patients with malignant pleural effusion.

        -  To evaluate whether chest drain size influences the amount of post-pleurodesis pain.

      OUTLINE: This is a multicenter study. Patients are stratified according to histological
      tissue type (mesothelioma vs non-mesothelioma) and thoracoscopic procedure. Patients are
      randomized to 1 of 4 treatment arms.

        -  Arm I: Patients undergo pleurodesis after placement of a large bore chest drain (24F)
           on day 0 and receive oral ibuprofen 3 times daily for 3 days. The chest tube is removed
           on day 3.

        -  Arm II: Patients undergo pleurodesis after placement of a small bore chest drain (12F)
           on day 0 and receive oral ibuprofen 3 times daily for 3 days. The chest tube is removed
           on day 3.

        -  Arm III: Patients undergo pleurodesis after placement of a large bore chest drain (24F)
           on day 0 and receive oral morphine sulfate 4 times daily for 3 days. The chest tube is
           removed on day 3.

        -  Arm IV: Patients undergo pleurodesis after placement of a small bore chest drain (12F)
           on day 0 and receive oral morphine sulfate 4 times daily for 3 days. The chest tube is
           removed on day 3.

      All patients will receive regular background analgesia comprising paracetamol 4 times daily
      on days 0-3. Patients not adequately treated with these regimens may also receive rescue
      analgesia comprising morphine sulfate IV on days 0-3.

      After completion of study treatment, patients are followed at 1, 3, and 6 months, and
      periodically thereafter.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS:

          -  Diagnosis of malignant pleural effusion requiring pleurodesis confirmed by 1 of the
             following:

               -  Histologically proven pleural malignancy

               -  Typical features of pleural malignancy seen on direct vision during thoracoscopy

               -  Pleural effusion in the context of histologically proven cancer elsewhere

          -  No primary lymphoma or small cell lung carcinoma

          -  All patients undergoing thoracoscopy for suspected malignant pleural effusion are
             eligible

        PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS:

          -  Life expectancy > 1 month

          -  Not pregnant or nursing

          -  No history of GI bleeding or untreated peptic ulceration

          -  No known sensitivity to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), opiates, or
             paracetamol

          -  No hypercapnic respiratory failure

          -  No known intravenous drug abuse

          -  No severe renal or liver disease

          -  No known bleeding diathesis

          -  Able to give informed consent

        PRIOR CONCURRENT THERAPY:

          -  More than 2 weeks since prior and no concurrent corticosteroid therapy

          -  No concurrent warfarin therapy

          -  No other concurrent analgesics

               -  Analgesics used as a breakthrough regimen are allowed from trial entry to tube
                  withdrawal at day 3 post-pleurodesis (i.e., regular paracetamol, assigned study
                  analgesia, and breakthrough medication only, including opiate slow release
                  patches)

          -  No concurrent enrollment on another clinical study

               -  Patients may participate in other trials immediately after completion of current
                  trial, excluding those involving further pleural procedures or analgesia trials
                  in which patients must wait at least 3 months after completion of current trial
