TITLE:
      Metformin Reduces Left Ventricular Mass in Patients With Ischemic Heart Disease
SUMMARY:
      Cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of death in the world. Most of the attention
      in treating ischemic heart disease (IHD) is understandably directed toward treating coronary
      artery disease. However there are other treatable culprits in these patients.

      Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is widespread in IHD patients, even in the absence of
      hypertension. It is a strong predictor of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality. In
      one study, the presence of LVH was a stronger predictor of mortality than either multivessel
      cor-onary disease or impaired LV function.

      Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent with a history of successful use in type 2 diabetes.
      In the UKPDS (United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study), metformin was associated with a
      39% lower risk of myocardial infarction compared with conventional therapy. Metformin also
      offered dual benefits of improving vascular function and lessening ischemia in nondiabetic
      patients.

      Hence, the main aim of this study was to assess whether metformin could regress LVM in
      patients with IHD. The secondary aim was to assess the effect of metformin on LV volumes and
      endothelial function in this patient group.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  They had to have normal glucose tolerance.

          -  They had to have either angiographically documented coronary artery disease or a
             previous history of myocardial infarction.

          -  They were required to have an office BP < 130/80 mm Hg

          -  The presence of LVH on echocardiography (American Society of Echocardiography
             criteria LVM index [LVMI] > 115 g/m2 for men and > 95 g/m2 for women).

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  They were currently prescribed metformin.

          -  They had renal and liver dysfunction, heart failure, or malignancy, or were unable to
             give informed consent.

          -  Patients with contraindications to cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) (pacemakers,
             claustrophobia) were also excluded, as were pregnant or lactating women.
