TITLE:
      Pharmacodynamic Study of Carvedilol Versus Metoprolol in Heart Failure
SUMMARY:
      Metoprolol succinate is a beta1-selective beta-blocker, becoming non-selective at higher
      doses, while carvedilol is non-selective. We examined whether metoprolol remained
      beta1-selective compared to carvedilol during dose up-titration in Class C heart failure
      (HF) Beta-blocker naïve patients.

      METHODS: Twenty-five NYHA FC II-III HF patients were randomized to carvedilol or metoprolol.
      Patients were studied at baseline and after 2 weeks of up-titration (metoprolol at 25, 50,
      100, and 200 mg daily; carvedilol IR at 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25 mg and 50mg twice daily).
      Beta2- blockade was determined by an infusion of terbutaline at 6 mg/kg over 1 hour. Glucose
      and potassium levels were serially measured at baseline, every 15 minutes for the 1st hour
      and 30 minutes for 2nd hour post-infusion. The median area under the curve (AUC) for glucose
      and potassium changes were calculated.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients eligible for the study had objective evidence of systolic dysfunction
             (ejection fraction ≤40%), were >18 years of age, and were on stable optimal medical
             heart failure therapy excluding the use of beta-blockers within the previous 30 days.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  . Patients were excluded for active viral myocarditis; hemodynamically significant
             valvular heart disease; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, peripartum cardiomyopathy;
             contra-indications to beta-blockers (asthma or obstructive airway disease requiring
             scheduled bronchodilators or inhaled steroids), resting heart rate <55; supine blood
             pressure <85/50; second or third degree heart block); concomitant use of
             beta-agonists, beta-antagonists, or anti-arrhythmics; unstable angina; myocardial
             infarction or bypass surgery within 3 months; or significant renal insufficiency
             (creatinine >2.5 mg/dL), liver disease (transaminase levels > 3 fold above laboratory
             normal), or anemia.
