TITLE:
      Trial of a Cardiac Rehabilitation Program Delivered Remotely Through the Internet
SUMMARY:
      Cardiac rehabilitation programs (CRP) are a proven treatment for those with ischemic heart
      disease (IHD). These programs have been demonstrated to improve adherence to regular
      physical activity, a healthy diet and smoking cessation, as well as modify risk factors for
      IHD such as hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, obesity and type 2 diabetes. In addition,
      CRP are cost effective and can result in a 25% reduction in reoccurrence of mortality.
      Despite the known benefits of CRP, as little as 10% to 25% of eligible patients attend these
      programs. One of the main barriers to attendance is proximity to a CRP, as the majority of
      these programs are limited to hospitals in large urban areas. However, cardiovascular
      diseases do not discriminate by geography, resulting in a geographic inequity of care for
      patients living in rural, remote and smaller urban/sub-urban centres. Currently there are no
      CRP specifically designed for patients in rural and remote areas. The use of the Internet
      may present itself as a viable alternative. We have recently completed a pilot study of a
      virtual CRP (vCRP) that demonstrated significant improvements in exercise capacity and risk
      factors. This investigation will study the vCRP in a group of IHD patients who do not have
      access to hospital-based CRP.

      Hypotheses A. Participation in a 4 month Internet-based cardiac rehabilitation program will
      result in significant improvements in exercise capacity compared to usual care, in patients
      with diagnosed IHD.

      B. Participation in a 4 month Internet-based cardiac rehabilitation program will result in
      significant improvements in exercise capacity after one year compared to usual care, in
      patients with diagnosed IHD.

      Study Population Men and women over 18 years will be identified from consecutive in-patients
      of the British Columbia Provincial Heart Centre at St. Paul's Hospital in Vancouver who
      reside in either the Northern Interior or Coast Garibaldi health areas. Patients will be
      eligible if they have IHD, Internet access, no previous experience with cardiac
      rehabilitation and no physical limitations to exercise. A total of 74 patients (37 per
      group) will be recruited and randomized to either usual care, or a 4 month 'virtual' cardiac
      rehabilitation program delivered via the Internet.

      Usual Care Group Patients randomized to usual care will be provided with simple guidelines
      for safe exercising and healthy eating habits, and return to the care of their primary care
      physician. Patients will return at 4 and 16 months later for outcome assessment. There will
      be no contact between the study personnel and usual care patients for the duration of the
      study, nor will there be any attempt to control the level of patient care.

      Intervention The vCRP has been developed to mimic hospital-based CRP and includes online
      intake forms, one-on-one chat sessions with vCRP nurse, dietitian and exercise specialist,
      data collection (exercise heart rate, blood pressure, glucose- if diabetic), peer-support
      group chat sessions, ask-an-expert chat sessions, education, progress reports and online
      resources. Upon randomization to the intervention, patients will receive access to the
      website, a heart rate monitor and a blood pressure monitor and trained in their use. The
      heart rate monitors allow for exercise heart rate data to be stored and downloaded to their
      home computer and then uploaded to the vCRP webserver. The exercise data will be reviewed
      weekly. A letter to the patient's primary care physician will be sent to outline the vCRP
      intervention, the treatment algorithms to be used and indicate under what circumstances the
      vCRP nurse and/or patient may contact them with regards to their management. Patients will
      receive one-on-one counselling by the nurse, dietitian and exercise specialist via chat
      sessions at 3 to 4 week intervals. After the 4 month intervention, patients will be
      discharged into the care of their primary care physician.

      Outcomes Participants will be assessed at baseline, 4 and 16 months for risk factors and
      lifestyle behaviours. The primary outcomes will be the change in exercise capacity as
      between the two groups from baseline to 4 months, and from baseline to 16 months. Exercise
      capacity will be assessed as total time on a symptom-limited exercise stress test.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Men and women admitted for an IHD event (acute coronary syndrome or revascularization
             procedure) who are at low or moderate risk.91

          2. Regular Internet access (home, work or other environment).

          3. Over 18 years of age.

          4. Permission of the attending physician.

          5. Able to read, write and understand English without difficulty.

          6. No physical limitations to regular activity.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Previous experience with a cardiac rehabilitation program.

          2. Patients with depression, uncontrolled diabetes and other significant co-morbidities
             that may interfere with effective IHD management.

          3. Those patients, who in the mind of the attending physician, are unsuitable for
             participation.

          4. Those unable to provide informed consent.

          5. Pregnant women.

          6. High-risk patients for safety considerations (future studies will include high-risk
             patients).
