TITLE:
      Safety and Performance Study of Large Hole Vascular Closure Device
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this Clinical Investigation is to gather feasibility data on the clinical use
      of the VIVASURE CLOSURE DEVICE™ in relation to safety, and to confirm its performance to
      percutaneously close femoral arterial puncture sites in the range of 18-24 F, post
      endovascular procedures.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This study will be a prospective, multi-centred, non-randomized pilot study to investigate
      the safety and performance of the VIVASURE CLOSURE DEVICE™. All patients undergoing a
      procedure requiring an arteriotomy in the range of 18 to 24 F, via the common femoral artery
      will be screened against the inclusion/exclusion criteria. If the patient meets the
      requirements of the clinical investigation, they shall be invited to participate, provide
      informed consent and shall subsequently be assigned a subject number.

      Patient safety will be monitored closely by the Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC).
      Safety data will be reported to the DSMC for every patient with a reported complication. The
      DSMC will adjudicate on the safety data to determine whether it is safe to continue
      enrolment.

      Subjects shall have a 1, 3 and 12 month follow-up assessment. Safety data from the
      follow-ups will be assessed by the Data Safety Monitoring Committee.

      This protocol will adopt the VARC-2 definitions for major vascular complication associated
      with closure of the access site.

      This pilot study will enrol approximately 10 subjects. The study is designed to support a
      larger CE Mark study. As such, a study safety assessment will be complete when all patients
      have completed their 1 month follow-up assessment. The Data Safety Monitoring Committee
      (DSMC) will review all complications and recommend whether it is safe to proceed to the CE
      Mark study. All patients will continue to be followed at 1, 3 and 12 month follow-ups.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Over 18 years of age.

          -  Each patient, or his or her guardian or legal representative, is willing to give
             informed consent.

          -  Clinically indicated for an endovascular procedure involving access through the
             femoral artery, with an access puncture of 18 - 24 F.

          -  Females who are not pregnant or lactating, and not planning to become pregnant ≤ 12
             months. A pregnancy test may be performed to confirm this.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        There will be no exclusion of patients from this trial in respect of race, co-existent
        disease or concomitant therapy, with the exception of those listed below.

          -  Severe acute non-cardiac systemic disease or terminal illness with a life expectancy
             of less than one year.

          -  Evidence of systemic bacterial or cutaneous infection, including groin infection.

          -  Evidence of MRSA (Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) and/or VRE
             (vancomycin-resistant Enterococci) colonisation.

          -  With arterial access other than the common femoral artery.*

          -  Patients suffering with definitive or potential coagulopathy or platelet count less
             than 100,000/µl.

          -  Patient with a haematocrit of less than 32 %.

          -  A measured activated clotting time (ACT) of greater than 350 seconds immediately
             prior to sheath removal.*

          -  If patients are expected to be continuously treated with anticoagulation therapy
             post-procedure such that their ACT reading is expected to be elevated above 350
             seconds for more than 24 hours after the procedure.

          -  Evidence of arterial diameter stenosis greater than 20 % within 20 mm of the
             arteriotomy.*

          -  Circumferential calcification within 20 mm of the arteriotomy.*

          -  Use of systemic thrombolytic agents within 24 hours prior to or during the
             catheterisation procedure which cause the concentration of fibrinogen to be less than
             100 mg/dl.

          -  Patients in which the arteriotomy is less than 18 F or greater than 24 F.*

          -  Known allergy to any of the materials used in the device (Refer to Instructions for
             Use).

          -  Currently enrolled in any other investigational clinical study, where the primary
             endpoint has not yet been achieved.

          -  Patients judged unsuitable for surgical repair of the access site.

          -  If puncture site is via a vascular graft.

          -  If there is any indication that the puncture has been made in the profunda femoris or
             located less than 10 mm above the profunda femoris.*

          -  Patients with a common femoral artery lumen diameter of less than 7 mm.

          -  Patients that have a lower extremity amputation from an access site limb.

          -  Patients that have undergone a percutaneous procedure using a non-absorbable vascular
             closure device (excluding suture mediated) for haemostasis in the ipsilateral leg.

          -  Patients that have undergone a percutaneous procedure greater than 8 F in the
             ipsilateral leg, within the previous 90 days.

          -  Patients that have undergone a percutaneous procedure of 8 F or less using an
             absorbable intravascular closure device for haemostasis, in the ipsilateral leg,
             within the previous 90 days.

          -  Patients that have undergone a percutaneous procedure of 8 F or less using a suture
             mediated closure device for haemostasis, in the ipsilateral leg, within the previous
             30 days.

          -  Patients that have undergone a percutaneous procedure of 8 F or less using
             manual/mechanical pressure for haemostasis in the ipsilateral leg, within the
             previous 30 days.

          -  Patients with an acute haematoma of any size, arteriovenous fistula or Pseudoaneurysm
             at the access site.*

          -  Significant blood loss/transfusion during interventional procedure or within 20 days
             prior to procedure requiring transfusion of greater than 4 units of blood.*

          -  Angiographic evidence of arterial laceration, dissection or stenosis within the
             external iliac or femoral artery before the use of the VCD.*

               -  May not be known until after the patient has given informed consent and the
                  procedure has started.
