TITLE:
      A Trial of Non-operative Versus Operative Management of Olecranon Fractures in the Elderly
SUMMARY:
      Proximal forearm fractures comprise approximately 5% of all fractures, with olecranon
      fractures accounting for almost 20% of thes fractures. There is limited conclusive evidence
      regarding the optimal treatment and outcome of these fractures within the elderly population
      with one case series in the literature describing 13 patients. Our trial includes all
      patients equal to or over the age of 75yrs presenting to the Edinburgh and Fife Orthopaedic
      Trauma Units with an isolated olecranon fracture. Patients who consent to enrol in the trial
      will be randomised to operative fixation using one of two treatment methods. Patients in the
      nonoperative group will be place in a sling for two weeks and then allowed to mobilise under
      supervised physiotherapy as per normal protocol. For those patients in the operative group,
      tension band wire of plate fixation will be employed depending on the choice of their
      supervising consultant. Patients will be evaluated over a one year period following their
      treatment.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Patients with undisplaced olecranon fractures can be treated non-operatively. The aims of
      treatment in displaced olecranon fractures are the restoration of function and stability to
      the elbow joint4. The technique employed should allow preservation and reconstruction of the
      articular surface with minimal associated complications. Tension-band wiring (TBW) is the
      most recognised and commonly used fixation method, although plate fixation and
      intramedullary screw fixation are noted alternatives. Potential problems with the TBW
      technique are wound breakdown, infection, prominent metalwork, malunion and non-union.
      Furthermore, plate fixation is considered to be superior in distal/comminuted/oblique
      fractures and fracture-dislocations, with superior fracture reduction and fixation results,
      as well as a lower rate of re-operation.

      The above described fixation techniques can be employed in elderly people, although
      difficulties associated with fixation in osteoporotic bone, wound breakdown and other
      complications is reported. In these patients, fracture excision with advancement of the
      triceps is a viable option if fixation is deemed inappropriate. However, there is limited
      evidence to suggest that non-operative treatment of displaced olecranon fractures in these
      elderly patients may provide adequate functional results. In a case series of 13 patients
      (mean age 81.8 years, >5 mm fracture displacement) treated non-operatively for a displaced
      olecranon fracture, outcome scores were excellent in 11 patients and poor in one.

      Research Aim To determine if any difference exists in outcome (primary measure - DASH score)
      after one year between non-operative management AND operative treatment for olecranon
      fractures in patients 75yrs or older (≥75yrs).

      Methodology This trial involves identifying patients over the age of 75yrs (≥75yrs)
      presenting to the Edinburgh Orthopaedic Trauma Unit and Fife Orthopaedic Trauma Unit with an
      isolated olecranon fracture. Patients who consent to enrol in the trial will be randomised
      to one of two recognised treatment techniques - non-operative management in a collar and
      cuff for two weeks OR operative management using tension band wire fixation or plate
      fixation. The trial will commence once ethical approval is granted by the Lothian Research
      Ethics Committee.

      All statistical analysis was/will be performed by Dr Rob Elton. Prior to the study a power
      analysis determined the number of patients required in each trial. The primary outcome
      measure will be the DASH score, a continuous variable that follows a normal
      (Gaussian-shaped) distribution. This study is designed to determine a clinically relevant
      mean difference of 10 points between the two cohorts at one year after enrolment. A power
      analysis indicated that a total sample size of 50 (25 in each group) subjects will provide
      80% statistical power to detect significant differences (0.05) in DASH scores, assuming an
      effect size of 0.8 (mean difference of 10 points, standard deviation of 12 points) using an
      unpaired t-test. To account for a possible loss to follow-up of up to 25%, we anticipate
      enrolling 35 subjects in each cohort for a total sample size of 70 subjects. A p value of <
      0.05 was considered statistically significant.

      All patients presenting to the units with a fracture of the olecranon that satisfy the
      inclusion criteria will be invited to participate in our study. Vulnerable populations will
      not be recruited.

      A qualified member of the on-call team will introduce the study to the patient and initiate
      informed consent. If the patient agrees, a research fellow (Trauma and Orthopaedic StR3
      level), not involved with the patient's care will review the study protocol in detail and
      address any questions the patient may have. If the patient is willing to participate, the
      research fellow will complete the informed consent with the patient. Patients will be given
      a copy of the consent form, and be informed that their participation is voluntary and that
      they can withdraw at any time during the study without detriment to their normal care in any
      way. Patients may take as long as they like to consider participation, provided that they
      still meet all the eligibility criteria documented above. Patients that are willing to
      participate in this study will get the same care of their fracture as patients that decide
      not to participate in the study.

      On enrolment, a data collection form will be started with demographic and injury-related
      information collected. Patients will be randomised (performed by Dr Rob Elton using closed
      opaque envelopes) into one of the two groups (non-operative or operative). Patients in the
      non-operative group will be placed in a collar and cuff for two weeks and allowed to
      mobilise under supervised physiotherapy as per normal protocol. Patients in this group can
      be placed in cast (~60 degrees of flexion) if pain is too severe. For those patients in the
      operative group, tension band wire of plate fixation will be employed depending on the
      choice of their supervising consultant. Following surgery, the post-operative assessment and
      course will be as per normal protocol for patients who are not in this study. Patients in
      the operative group will be immobilised depending on fracture fixation during surgery and
      the decision will be made by the treating surgeon. Physiotherapy will be arranged when
      required

      All follow-up assessment will take place during follow-up visits initially with the treating
      consultant surgeon's team and a dedicated member of the research team. Radiographs and other
      diagnostic studies will be obtained at the discretion of the treating surgeon and will not
      differ from routine clinical care.

      Follow-up assessment will be collected over a one year period (2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6
      months and one year). Routine follow-up in our institution for patients who have sustained
      an olecranon fracture that is managed operatively involves outpatient clinic reviews with
      radiographs at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, three months and six months. Therefore, one additional
      visit at 1 year is required for this study with no additional radiographs. Radiographs will
      only be performed at one year on clinical indication.

      At each visit physical examination, treatment, complications and re-operation (e.g. hardware
      removal), for each patient will be recorded. A member of the research team, blinded to the
      treatment method by sticking plaster over the entry position, will undertake functional
      testing and assessment.

      By statistically analysing the outcome scores in the two groups, I aim to better determine
      the optimal management of this fracture in this age group. Using univariate analysis and
      multivariate regression analysis I will determine significant (p<0.05) predictors of outcome
      in relation to functional outcome score (DASH at one year).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age ≥75 years

          -  Minimal, moderate or severe fragmentation of the olecranon

          -  Within two weeks of olecranon fracture

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients unable to give informed consent

          -  Associated fractures to the coronoid, radial head and/or distal humerus

          -  Associated ligamentous injury, dislocation or subluxation

          -  Open fractures
