TITLE:
      Antiplatelet Therapy to Prevent Stroke in African Americans
SUMMARY:
      The African-American Antiplatelet Stroke Prevention Study is designed to prevent recurrent
      strokes by administration of aspirin or ticlopidine. The study also provides community
      information on reducing risk of stroke and recognizing the symptoms of stroke. The study
      involves more than 50 participating hospitals located throughout the United States. Study
      medication is provided free of charge, and a transportation stipend is available for those
      in need.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Stroke is one of the important diseases that disproportionately affects African-Americans.
      African-American men and women are about 2 times more likely than whites to die of
      cerebrovascular disease or experience stroke. Scientific information about the efficacy and
      safety of stroke preventatives in this group is much needed, yet African-Americans and other
      minorities have been underrepresented in biomedical research studies. Preliminary data
      collected from nonwhite, predominantly African-American patients, suggest that ticlopidine
      is more effective than aspirin in the secondary prevention of stroke and death for these
      patients and that the risk of serious adverse events is lower. This is a multicenter,
      randomized, double-blind clinical trial of ticlopidine hydrochloride (500mg/day) and aspirin
      (650mg/day) in African-American patients with recent non-cardioembolic ischemic stroke. The
      primary purpose of the study is to compare the efficacy of ticlopidine and aspirin in the
      prevention of the outcome endpoints recurrent stroke, vascular death, and myocardial
      infarction in these African-American patients. Adverse experiences will be studied to
      further our understanding of the safety of these medications in this group. The study is
      being conducted at 50 sites experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of stroke. 1800
      patients are being enrolled over 3-5 years, and each will be in the study for at least 2
      years. Patients will be randomly assigned to treatment at least 7 days, but no more than 90
      days after cerebral infarction. The trial promises to provide much needed information about
      secondary stroke prevention in African-Americans and has the support of established
      African-American physician, church-based, and community organizations. Enrollment of a
      substantial number of African-American women is anticipated. Data from these patients will
      significantly add to our understanding of cerebrovascular disease among black women.
      Furthermore, the study could also serve as an organizational framework for future studies of
      stroke prevention or hyperacute treatment in the African-American population.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  African Americans are eligible if they had a non-cardioembolic ischemic stroke at
             lease 7 days, but no more than 90 days before entering the trial.

          -  African American

          -  29-85 years of age

          -  Non-cardioembolic cerebral infarct

          -  Onset of entry stroke at least 7 days but no more than 90 days

          -  CT or MRI following entry stroke and consistent with occurrence of entry stroke
             (i.e., shows entry infarct, shows old infarct, or shows no infarct) Measurable
             neurologic deficit that correlates with onset of entry stroke.

          -  Informed consent

          -  Able to follow outpatient treatment program

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Volunteers with transient ischemic attack (TIA) as the potentially qualifying event,
             intracranial hemorrhage, nonatherosclerotic stroke, sensitivity or major allergy to
             the study drugs, Modified Barthel Index < 10 or childbearing potential are not
             eligible.

          -  Non-qualifying entry events: TIA, subarachnoid hemorrhage, cardiac embolism,
             iatrogenic stroke, postoperative stroke within 30 days of operation, and carotid
             endarterectomy as preventive treatment of entry stroke.

          -  Mean arterial blood pressure > 130mmHg on 3 consecutive days

          -  Modified Barthel Index < 10

          -  History of dementia or neurodegenerative disease

          -  Severe comorbid condition such as cancer that would limit survival during 2 year
             follow-up period

          -  Concurrent enrollment in another clinical trial

          -  Sensitivity or allergy to aspirin or ticlopidine

          -  Women of childbearing potential

          -  Peptic ulcer disease, active bleeding diathesis, lower gastrointestinal bleeding,
             platelet or other hematologic abnormality currently active or clinically active in
             the past year, hematuria, positive stool guaiac, prolonged PT or PTT, BUN > 40mg%,
             serum creatinine > 2.0mg%, thrombocytopenia or neutropenia as defined by the lower
             limit of normal for the platelet count or white blood cell count, respectively
             (absolute neutrophil count of > 1800/mm3 required for participation), or > 2 times
             the upper range of normal on liver function tests (SGOT, SGPT, total bilirubin)
