TITLE:
      Characteristics of Idiopathic Familial Voice Disorders
SUMMARY:
      The purpose the study is to determine the genetic causes of specific voice disorders that
      run in families. Researchers are particularly interested in two conditions;

        1. Spasmodic dysphonia

        2. Vocal fold paralysis

      Familial vocal fold paralysis can be a life-threatening disorder that can cause difficulty
      with vocal fold movement for breathing and voice and sometimes for swallowing. Studies are
      ongoing at the NIH to better understand the pathophysiology and to relate it to the genetic
      pattern of inheritance. Families are being recruited to participate in these studies and are
      being provided with further information on the disorder and genetic counseling if desired.
      Physician referral is requested for affected members of families with vocal fold paralysis
      of an unknown cause occurring over at least 2 generations. All travel, lodging, examination
      and counseling costs are covered for both affected and unaffected members of a family.
      Examinations include: voice, laryngeal, neurological, electrodiagnostic testing, genetic
      counseling, and radiological studies....
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      OBJECTIVE:

      Our purpose is to examine for evidence of genetic risk factors associated with idiopathic
      laryngeal motor control disorders. During the conception of the protocol, we were interested
      in investigating the pattern of inheritance of familial voice disorders, specifically
      spasmodic dysphonia and tremor. Interestingly, the initial search for families revealed
      several large families with idiopathic vocal fold paralysis with some family members
      experiencing symptoms of spasmodic dysphonia. During subsequent years, the research has
      focused on inherited forms of vocal fold paralysis in an attempt to determine the
      relationship between the laryngeal motor control disorder and other associated neuropathies,
      and to determine the existence of a specific genetic abnormality. These idiopathic laryngeal
      motor control disorders were one manifestation of peripheral neuropathies or may be an
      isolated disorder with only laryngeal involvement. Subsequently, we have shifted our
      emphasis back to the identification of genetic risk factors for spasmodic dysphonia.

      Hypothesis 1) Familial risk factors for spasmodic dysphonia result in a particular phenotype
      and genotype.

      Hypothesis 2) Environmental risk factors may differentiate between affected and unaffected
      members of families with spasmodic dysphonia.

      Hypothesis 3) Whole genome screening will identify SNPs associated with the occurrence of
      spasmodic dysphonia.

      STUDY POPULATION:

      Families with multiple members affected with spasmodic dysphonia, vocal fold paralysis, and
      tremor will be ascertained.

      DESIGN:

      A pedigree will be developed via a questionnaire and voice history. Affected and unaffected
      family members will be examined to determine the presence and extent of their laryngeal
      motor control disorder. Affected family members will also undergo neurological examination
      and nerve and muscle studies to determine the loci of their pathology. A genotype will be
      developed for affected and unaffected family members, through DNA testing of blood samples.

      OUTCOME MEASURES:

      This is a natural history study characterizing the phenotype and genotype of idiopathic
      laryngeal motor control disorders.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      -  INCLUSION CRITERIA:

        Symptoms present during speech and not apparent at rest,

        Symptoms less evident during whisper, singing or falsetto.

        Symptoms become worse with prolonged speaking, practice or anxiety.

        Reflexive and emotional aspects of voice function are unaffected, such as coughing,
        laughter or crying.

        EXCLUSION CRITERIA:

        Any patient with a history of airway obstruction will be excluded from the study.

        Structural abnormalities affecting the larynx such as vocal fold nodules, polyps,
        carcinoma, cysts, contact ulcers, or inflammation (laryngitis).

        Reduction in vocal fold movement range during non-speech tasks such as whistling which
        would suggest either paralysis or paresis, joint abnormality or neoplasm.

        No smokers or tobacco users will be included in the study.

        Subjects with history of a psychiatric disorder, under the care of a psychiatrist, or on
        medications for treatment of a psychiatric disorder will be excluded from the study.
        Examples of psychiatric disorders to be excluded are: somatoform disorders, conversion
        disorders, currently under treatment for a major depression, or a history of schizophrenia
        or a bipolar disorder. However, a history of a previous episode of a minor reactive
        depression would not exclude a person from participation.
