TITLE:
      The Effects of Modafinil on Waking Function and on Sleep in Individuals With Primary Insomnia
SUMMARY:
      This study examines how treatment with the drug modafinil, by itself or in combination with
      cognitive behavioral treatment for insomnia (CBT-I), may improve daytime functioning and/or
      diminish the severity of insomnia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Our primary goal is to undertake a 2nd study evaluating whether Modafinil, alone or in
      combination with behavioral treatment for insomnia, will improve subjects' sleep continuity
      and/or self report daytime function.

      METHODS AND PROCEDURES

      Schedule for Procedures.

      Screening interview Sleep over night in our lab for one night 8 weeks of either behavioral
      or psychological therapy for insomnia 3 month post therapy follow up (two weeks of sleep
      diaries and one lab visit)

      40 patients aged 25-80 with insomnia. All subjects will have a stable sleep/wake schedule
      with a preferred sleep phase between 10:00 PM and 8:00 AM. The age range is restricted to 1)
      minimize circadian rhythm influences on the diagnoses of Psychophysiological insomnia, 2) to
      increase our ability to recruit medically healthy sample, and 3) increase sample
      homogeneity.

      All subjects will meet diagnostic criteria for Psychophysiological Insomnia according to the
      International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD). Criteria are: the complaint of
      insomnia and impaired daytime function; an indication of learned sleep-preventing
      associations and somatized tension; active help seeking. The complaint of disturbed sleep
      will have one or more of the following characteristics: >30 minutes to fall asleep and/or >2
      awakenings per night of >15 minutes duration and/or wake after sleep onset time of > 30
      minutes, problem frequency >4 nights/ week, and problem duration >6 months. In addition, all
      subjects will complain of fatigue and/or sleepiness at intake.

      Treatment.

      Regardless of group assignment, all subjects will 1) wear an actiwatch, 2) be seen on an
      individual basis for 8 weeks. Session length will be held constant and all patients will be
      seen by the same therapist (Wilfred Pigeon, PhD). Backup support will be provided by the
      Principal Investigator (Michael Perlis, PhD) or by the Clinic's Nurse Practitioner (Carla
      Jungquist, MSN) and 3) complete daily sleep diaries for duration of the study (from study
      intake until study end [8 weeks]).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  40 patients aged 25 with insomnia, will be recruited over a 3-6 month interval.

          -  All subjects will have a stable sleep/wake schedule with a preferred sleep phase
             between 10:00 PM and 8:00 AM.

          -  Must live in the Greater Rochester NY area

          -  All subjects will meet diagnostic criteria for Psychophysiological Insomnia according
             to the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD). Criteria are: the
             complaint of insomnia and impaired daytime function; an indication of learned
             sleep-preventing associations and somatized tension; active help seeking. The
             complaint of disturbed sleep will have one or more of the following characteristics:
             >30 minutes to fall asleep and/or >2 awakenings per night of >15 minutes duration
             and/or wake after sleep onset time of > 30 minutes, problem frequency >4 nights/
             week, and problem duration >6 months. In addition, all subjects will complain of
             fatigue and/or sleepiness at intake.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  As above
