TITLE:
      Study of Intradermal Administration of PCEC Rabies Vaccine
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine immunogenicity and safety of intradermal
      administration of the PCEC rabies vaccine in adults.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Approximately 16,000-39,000 persons come in contact with potentially rabid animals and
      receive rabies postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) each year in the US. To appropriately manage
      potential human exposures to rabies, the risk for infection must be accurately assessed.
      Administration of rabies PEP is a medical urgency, not a medical emergency, but decisions
      must not be delayed. Prophylaxis is occasionally complicated by adverse reactions, but these
      reactions are rarely severe. Current data on the safety and efficacy of active and passive
      rabies vaccination were derived from both human and animal studies. Timely and appropriate
      human pre-exposure prophylaxis (Pre-EP) and PEP will prevent human rabies. Currently in the
      US, the approved dosage and administration for PEP in previously unvaccinated persons
      consists of the administration of vaccine (HDCV or PCECV) and HRIG. Vaccine is administered
      IM on days 0, 3, 7, 21, and 28 (deltoid area). The approved dosage and administration for
      pre-exposure prophylaxis (Pre-EP) consists of three 1.0-mL injections of vaccine (HDCV or
      PCECV) administered IM (deltoid area), one injection per day on days 0, 7, and 21 or 28).
      Intradermal (ID) route of administration of rabies vaccination is used in certain countries
      both for PEP and Pre-EP, and approved by WHO for modern potent cell culture vaccines. Recent
      studies outside the USA found the use of PCEC rabies vaccine by ID administration
      immunogenic and safe.

      The primary goals of this study are to obtain additional safety and immunogenicity data on
      ID administration of 0.1 mL doses of the inactivated PCEC rabies virus vaccine in adults.
      Given the need to provide alternative routes of administration to the current approved
      intramuscular route in order to protect a larger number of people facing potential vaccine
      shortages. The data yielded by this clinical trial will provide evidence to support
      alternative route of administration and dose of PCECV in the US.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Laboratory personnel, epidemiologists, EISOs, veterinary students, interns, and other
             first responders at CDC; other CDC employees; and healthy volunteer adults. Persons
             who contact the study coordinator will be assessed for possible occupational exposure
             to rabies using the risk assessment form (appendix E). The volunteers reporting
             occupational exposure will be selected to enter the study.

          2. Male or nonpregnant females (as indicated by a negative urine pregnancy test prior to
             first dose of vaccine), aged 18 years and older.

          3. Women of childbearing potential who are at risk of becoming pregnant must agree to
             practice adequate contraception (i.e., barrier method, abstinence, or licensed
             hormonal methods) for the entire study period.

          4. Be in good health, as determined by vital signs (pulse, blood pressure, oral
             temperature), medical history, and a targeted physical examination based on medical
             history.

          5. Able to understand and comply with planned study procedures.

          6. Provide informed consent prior to any study procedures and be available for all study
             visits.

          7. Have health insurance.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Have a known allergy to PCECV.

          2. Have a known allergy or sensitivity to eggs or latex (in the stopper).

          3. Have a positive urine pregnancy test prior to first vaccine dose (female of
             childbearing potential age).

          4. Are immunosuppressed as a result of an underlying illness or treatment.

          5. Have active neoplastic disease or a history of any hematologic malignancy.

          6. Are using oral or parenteral steroids, high-dose inhaled steroids (>800 μg/day of
             beclomethasone dipropionate or equivalent) or other immunosuppressive or cytotoxic
             drugs.

          7. Have a history of receiving immunoglobulin or other blood product within the 3 months
             prior to enrollment in this study.

          8. Have an acute illness that is accompanied by an oral temperature greater than
             100.4°F, within 1 week of vaccination.

          9. Received an experimental agent (vaccine, drug, biologic, device, blood product, or
             medication) within 1 month prior to enrollment in this study, or expects to receive
             an experimental agent during the 1st month of the study period.

         10. Have any condition that would, in the opinion of the site investigator, place the
             subject at an unacceptable risk of injury or render the subject unable to meet the
             requirements of the protocol.

         11. He/she is a CDC worker under direct supervision of any of the primary study
             investigators (Dr. Sergio Recuenco, and Dr. Eli Warnock).
