TITLE:
      Chest Wall Influence on Respiratory System Mechanics in Morbidly Obese Patients
SUMMARY:
      The goal of this study is to describe the influence of the chest wall on the respiratory
      system mechanics in morbidly obese patients and in patients with high intra-abdominal
      pressure.

      The effects of increasing and decreasing positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) on chest
      wall and total respiratory system mechanics, lung volumes and gas exchange will be
      evaluated, both during controlled and assisted mechanical ventilation.

      Patients will be studied, first, during the acute phase of respiratory failure, when
      requiring intubation and controlled mechanical ventilation. Then, patients will be evaluated
      again during weaning from the ventilator to assess the influence of PEEP in assisted
      ventilation prior to extubation.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The goal of this study is to describe the influence of the chest wall on the respiratory
      system mechanics. Investigators want to describe how extreme obesity and Intra-Abdominal
      Hypertension (IAH) affect normal respiratory system behavior. The effects of increasing and
      decreasing positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) on respiratory system mechanics, lung
      volumes and gas exchange will be evaluated, both during controlled and assisted mechanical
      ventilation.

      Investigators will record and compare lung volumes, airway and transpulmonary pressure, gas
      exchange and hemodynamic changes caused by variations of PEEP. Patients will be studied,
      first, during the acute phase of respiratory failure, when requiring intubation and
      controlled mechanical ventilation. Patients will then again be evaluated during weaning from
      the ventilator to assess the influence of PEEP in assisted ventilation prior to extubation.

      Investigators believe that assessment of the transpulmonary pressure and lung volumes is
      essential to correctly evaluate respiratory system function in patients in which the
      relationship between the lung and chest wall is altered. Improper mechanical ventilation
      leads to lung damage. High ventilatory volume/pressure are associated with lung
      overdistension, while low volume/pressure leads to lung collapse and cyclic opening and
      closing of alveoli. All of these mechanisms have been associated with ventilator induced
      lung injury and poorer outcomes. Adequate PEEP and transpulmonary pressure are fundamental
      in preventing this vicious cycle.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  18 years or older

          -  Requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation

          -  BMI≥40 kg/m2 or IAP≥12 mmHg

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Known presence esophageal varices

          -  Recent esophageal trauma or surgery

          -  Severe thrombocytopenia (PTL≤10,000/mm3)

          -  Severe coagulopathy (INR≥2)

          -  Presence of pneumothorax

          -  Pregnancy

          -  Patients with diagnosed moderate to severe ARDS or with poor oxygenation index
             (PaO2/FiO2 < 200 mmHg)
