TITLE:
      Involving Men in Maternity Care in Burkina Faso
SUMMARY:
      The uptake of postpartum contraception, postpartum care attendance and the practice of
      exclusive breastfeeding are low in Sub-Saharan Africa. Although the involvement of men in
      maternity care has been shown to be a promising strategy for the achievement of other
      reproductive health goals, little is known about the effect of their participation on these
      outcomes. This study aims to test whether the involvement of men can improve care-seeking
      and promote healthy behaviours among postpartum women in Burkina Faso.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      There is a paucity of evidence on strategies to increase the uptake of postpartum
      contraception and attendance at facility-based postpartum care in developing countries,
      including in Sub-Saharan Africa. There is also a need to test new solutions to improve
      adherence to recommended infant feeding practices in these settings. Partner opposition is a
      major barrier to women's uptake of contraceptive methods in the postpartum period in Burkina
      Faso, and research has shown the need to sensitise and inform men about a broad range of
      topics related to reproductive health. However, the effect of involving male partners on
      women's and newborns' health and wellbeing in low-resource settings is not well known, and
      there is particularly little evidence for outcomes related to the postpartum period.

      The aim of this study is to assess whether male partner involvement in maternity care has
      the potential to increase care-seeking and promote healthy behaviours among postpartum women
      in an urban West-African setting. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) of an intervention to
      promote the involvement in maternity care of the partners of pregnant women attending
      primary health care facilities will be conducted in the city of Bobo-Dioulasso. The
      intervention consists of three extra components in addition to standard maternity care: one
      extra couple counselling session during pregnancy (A), partner participation in a group
      education session for men (B), and partner participation in the pre-discharge consultation
      after birth (C). Women in the control group will receive standard maternity care only, in
      which men do not participate.

      A qualitative component will be carried out alongside the RCT, in order to examine the
      factors that may have determined the success, or lack thereof, of the intervention by
      reflecting on the experience of participants (women, partners , and health workers), and to
      explore their attitudes, beliefs and concerns relative to partner involvement in maternity
      care, through focus group discussions and in-depth interviews.

      The policy implications of the study findings will be assessed and, if appropriate, a
      strategy will be developed for their dissemination among policymakers and other
      stakeholders.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age 16-18, married, or

          -  Age 18+, in a co-habiting relationship

          -  Pregnant 24-36 weeks

          -  No obstetric risk factors requiring hospital delivery

          -  Lives no more than one hour away on foot, not planning to move from the city

          -  Gives informed consent

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Not meeting inclusion criteria

          -  Declines to participate
