TITLE:
      Ramelteon Prevention of Delirium - RCT
SUMMARY:
      Delirium is a common morbid condition in hospitalized adults. Treatment of delirium has been
      unsatisfactory and prevention is the preferred goal. Based on limited experimental research,
      ramelteon appears to have promise for prevention. This study will evaluate ramelteon in
      prevention of delirium in a hospitalized adult population age 65+ in a double-blinded RCT.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Delirium is a very common condition that is associated with significant complications in
      hospitalized adults.

      The manifestations of delirium are the result of a disturbance of brain functioning, the
      causes of which include a very wide array of illnesses, intoxications, and stresses.
      Delirium has been estimated to affect 20-50% of hospitalized patients, and to be associated
      with longer hospital stay (2x), greater likelihood of discharge to nursing home (2x), and
      higher rate of death (2x). 20% have delirium on admission. Patients who experience delirium
      may have persistent confusion (cognitive impairment). In 20%, this confusion appears to be
      permanent. Treatment of delirium has been unsatisfactory. Once it develops, no therapy or
      intervention has demonstrated a meaningful reduction of delirium associated complications.
      Prevention is clearly the preferred goal. Based on limited reports, ramelteon appears to
      have the most promise for prevention. Ramelteon, FDA approved (2005) as a nonscheduled
      prescription hypnotic agent, is generally considered safe and effective with no serious
      associated side effects, and no limitation of duration of use. It is related to melatonin in
      action and shares sleep promoting effects (reduced sleep latency) and improvement in
      coordination of circadian cycles. A recent randomized placebo-controlled single blinded
      trial of ramelteon treated 33 patients with ramelteon 8 mg/d. The researchers reported that
      ramelteon was associated with a dramatically lower risk of delirium (3% vs 32%; P = .003),
      with a relative risk of 0.09. Estimates of time to develop delirium were delayed for
      ramelteon compared to placebo, and the frequency of delirium was significantly lower in
      ramelteon compared to placebo (P = .002). There were significant limitations of this study,
      however, including a very high exclusion rate (1059 of 1126 [94%] patients assessed were
      excluded), a 24+ hour delay in initiation of study agent, a small sample size, and unclear
      sampling bias. The investigators propose a clinical trial of ramelteon to prevent delirium
      in patients admitted to Hartford Hospital. Hartford Hospital is in a unique position to
      conduct this study having established the ADAPT program to systematically apply best
      practices to the assessment and management of delirium. A registry of patients screened
      contains all of the screening results (over 1.5 million CAM screens on nearly 91,000
      patients). Our study will permit us to evaluate the recent limited research findings
      regarding ramelteon in a larger general adult hospitalized population, and evaluate the
      potential benefit of treatment started earlier in the course of a hospitalization.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  from designated nursing units

        Exclusion Criteria:
