TITLE:
      Evaluation of Rapid Emergency Echography for Acute Dyspnoea
SUMMARY:
      Elderly people constitute the largest proportion of emergency room patients, representing
      12% of all emergency room admissions. The need for diagnostic tests or therapeutic
      interventions is much greater in this patient population. Cardiovascular diseases and
      symptoms represent 12% of the causes for emergency room admission, and patients suffering
      from cardiovascular disease are those whose emergency room visit lasts longest.

      The diagnostic approach in the emergency room in elderly patients admitted for acute
      dypsnoea is complex, and early identification of acute left-sided heart failure (ALSHF) is
      vital as it has an impact on prognosis. The clinical signs are difficult to interpret, and
      are non-specific, particularly at the acute phase and in elderly or obese patients. Indeed,
      some authors have reported up to 50% of diagnostic errors in elderly patients.

      Measure of the blood concentration of a natriuretic peptide allows a quick diagnosis.
      However, peptides suffer from several limitations, particularly in situations that are often
      encountered in elderly patients, such as sepsis, renal failure, acute coronary syndrome,
      pulmonary embolism, chronic respiratory failure, atrial fibrillation and high body mass
      index. Diagnostic performance deteriorates with increasing age, and there is a significant
      increase in this grey-zone in patients aged ≥75 years. In critical situations in elderly
      patients, assessment of natriuretic peptides serve mainly to rule out a diagnosis of left
      heart failure.

      Some authors have suggested using lung ultrasound in the initial work-up of acute
      respiratory failure, since some specific profiles are known to be related to the presence of
      interstitial oedema, reflecting impaired left heart function (e.g. presence of B lines).
      These studies were performed in the context of intensive or critical care, but data are
      sparse regarding the application of this approach in the emergency room.

      The hypothesis is that the diagnostic accuracy of a targeted and quick echographic approach,
      namely the READ method (Rapid Echography for Acute Dyspnoea), comprising targeted lung
      ultrasound combined with isolated measure of transmitral flow, would be superior to that of
      NT-proBNP assessment for the diagnosis of ALSHF in elderly patients (≥75 years) admitted to
      the emergency department.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The number of emergency room visits is constantly increasing, and it is therefore necessary
      to minimize the duration of each visit, thereby increasing the efficacy of the diagnostic
      process, leading to quicker orientation of each patient for appropriate care. In this
      context, accurate triage and a quick initial diagnostic work-up are of paramount importance
      in achieving this goal.

      Elderly people constitute the largest proportion of emergency room patients, representing
      12% of all emergency room admissions. The need for diagnostic tests or therapeutic
      interventions is much greater in this patient population, with 4 out of 5 patients requiring
      such measures. Indeed, elderly persons often suffer from multiple diseases that require a
      greater number of tests (source: Direction de la recherche, des études, de l'évaluation et
      des statistiques (DREES), emergency room survey) (1).

      Cardiovascular diseases and symptoms represent 12% of the causes for emergency room
      admission, and patients suffering from cardiovascular disease are those whose emergency room
      visit lasts longest. Indeed, almost 50% of patients with cardiovascular disease stay more
      than 4 hours in the emergency room, according to a French national survey published in July
      2014.

      The diagnostic approach in the emergency room in elderly patients admitted for acute
      dypsnoea is complex, and early identification of acute left-sided heart failure (ALSHF) is
      vital as it has an impact on prognosis.

      Acute dyspnoea and acute respiratory insufficiency are frequent causes of admission to the
      emergency room. The etiological diagnosis is difficult, especially in elderly patients who
      often have a history of cardio-respiratory disease (2)(3)(4)(5). In this specific
      population, there are often numerous comorbidities, such as chronic respiratory failure,
      chronic renal failure, and ischemic heart disease (6). In addition, acute respiratory
      insufficiency can be caused by a range of distinct pathologies, such as acute heart failure,
      pneumonia, exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pleural effusion or
      pulmonary embolism. There is thus clearly a pressing need for an accurate and early
      diagnosis of the correct etiology in these patients, particularly to identify ALSHF, a
      condition that requires immediate initiation of appropriate therapy in order to improve
      prognosis. In these patients, studies have shown that inappropriate or delayed therapy in
      the emergency room is an independent predictor of death (2)(3)(7).

      The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recently published a review of the standard
      diagnostic methods for ALSHF, describing the advantages and limitations of each (clinical
      examination, electrocardiogram (ECG), chest x-ray, NT-proBNP assessment) (8).

      The clinical signs are difficult to interpret, and are non-specific, particularly at the
      acute phase and in elderly or obese patients (9). Indeed, some authors have reported up to
      50% of diagnostic errors in elderly patients (10).

      Chest x-ray, which is usually performed in the emergency room, is not specific because of
      the conditions in which it is performed in emergency situations. Generally, the
      pre-requisites for proper implementation are not fully respected because of the emergency
      nature of the exam, and chest x-ray is therefore primarily useful for differential diagnosis
      only (8).

      Early echocardiography is recommended in patients presenting to the hospital in an emergency
      with suspected heart failure (HF) and acute onset of symptoms. Imaging techniques play a
      central role in the diagnosis of HF and in guiding treatment. Among the several imaging
      modalities available, echocardiography is the method of choice in patients with suspected HF
      for reasons of accuracy, availability (including portability), safety and cost. The term
      echocardiography is used here to refer to all cardiac ultrasound imaging techniques,
      including two- or three-dimensional echocardiography, pulsed and continuous wave Doppler,
      colour flow Doppler, and tissue Doppler imaging. For assessment of left ventricular systolic
      and diastolic dysfunction, no single echocardiographic parameter is sufficiently accurate
      and reproducible to be used in isolation. Therefore, a comprehensive echocardiographic
      examination incorporating all relevant two-dimensional and Doppler data is recommended. This
      should include the evaluation of both structural and functional abnormalities.

      However, this type of specialised echocardiography is not routinely available in most
      emergency rooms. In routine practice, systematic specialised echocardiography by a
      cardiologist for all cases of acute respiratory failure is not feasible due to the lack of
      trained operators. Indeed, training in specialised echocardiography is not a pre-requisite
      to become a qualified emergency room physician in France. Lastly, specialised
      echocardiography exams are time-consuming and incompatible with the need to manage the vast
      flow of patients through a busy emergency room.

      An alternative approach to diagnosis is to measure the blood concentration of a natriuretic
      peptide, a family of hormones secreted in increased amounts when the heart is diseased or
      the load on any chamber is increased (11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16). However, peptides suffer from
      several limitations, particularly in situations that are often encountered in elderly
      patients, such as sepsis, renal failure, acute coronary syndrome, pulmonary embolism,
      chronic respiratory failure, atrial fibrillation and high body mass index (17). Diagnostic
      performance deteriorates with increasing age, and there is a significant increase in this
      grey-zone in patients aged ≥75 years (8)(16)(18)(19). In critical situations in elderly
      patients, assessment of natriuretic peptides serve mainly to rule out a diagnosis of left
      heart failure (8)(16)(19).

      Some authors have suggested using lung ultrasound in the initial work-up of acute
      respiratory failure (20)(21)(22)(23)(24)(25)(26), since some specific profiles are known to
      be related to the presence of interstitial oedema, reflecting impaired left heart function
      (e.g. presence of B lines) (27)(28). These studies were performed in the context of
      intensive or critical care, but data are sparse regarding the application of this approach
      in the emergency room.

      In a preliminary, single-centre study, the utility of a quick transthoracic echography
      approach was investigated, namely the READ method (Rapid Echography for Acute Dyspnoea),
      which associated targeted lung ultrasound and measure of transmitral flow in 51 patients
      aged ≥75 years. When performed at the patient's admission to the emergency room, the READ
      method was showed to have a sensitivity of 95% for the identification of ALSHF. Indeed,
      analysis of transmitral flow is easily available by transthoracic echography. The presence
      of a "restrictive" pattern in case of acute dypsnoea is associated with the existence of
      ALSHF (29)(30)(31)(32)(33).

      Echography is a diagnostic tool whose use in the emergency room is increasing exponentially.
      For example, the "Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma" (FAST) ultrasound assessment
      technique in trauma patients has become the cornerstone of initial triage in trauma
      patients. The idea is to use targeted ultrasound, not necessarily performed by a specialist,
      to achieve accurate triage of patients in only a few minutes to guide subsequent diagnostic
      and therapeutic approaches.

      There is a paucity of well-conducted studies in the literature evaluating the utility of
      targeted chest ultrasound in the diagnostic work-up of acute dyspnoea in elderly patients
      admitted to the emergency department. There currently exists no consensus regarding the use
      of echography in these patients, and its use largely depends on the competency and
      availability of operators in the emergency, in the absence of formal evidence proving its
      utility. Biomarkers such as brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or NT-proBNP lack sensitivity in
      this age-category of patients, although they are widely used in routine practice given the
      impossibility of rapid, and 24/7 access to specialised echocardiography.

      In this context, the study hypothesis is that the diagnostic accuracy of a targeted and
      quick echographic approach, namely the READ method (Rapid Echography for Acute Dyspnoea),
      comprising targeted lung ultrasound combined with isolated measure of transmitral flow,
      would be superior to that of NT-proBNP assessment for the diagnosis of ALSHF in elderly
      patients (≥75 years) admitted to the emergency department.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Admission to the Emergency Department Age ≥ 75 years

        AND criteria of acute dyspnoea:

          -  Breathe rate ≥ 25 cycles/minute

          -  or PaO2 ≤ 70 mmHg

          -  or SpO2 ≤ 92% in room air

          -  or PacO2 ≥ 45 mmHg and pH ≤ 7.35 AND Electrocardiogram in sinus rhythm at admission

        Exclusion Criteria:
