TITLE:
      Delirium at the Intensive Care Unit - a Retrospective Cohort Study
SUMMARY:
      This project seeks to describe the incidence of delirium in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
      and to identify risk and preventive factors associated with development of delirium.

      Especially, the investigators want to investigate if an imitated natural light/dark cycle
      influences frequency of delirium.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      A common problem for patients in the ICU is episodes of delirium. Recent trials have
      described incidences ranging from 60-87% of patients in a number of different countries.
      Delirium is a condition with fluctuating conscience, disorganized thinking and disturbance
      of the sleep/wake cycle. Many patients with delirium experience hallucinations and agitation
      which can be very unpleasant for both patients and their families.

      Some risk factors for the development of delirium well known, e.g. dementia, hypertension,
      illness severity (SAPS II score), delirium on the previous day, mechanical ventilation,
      emergency surgery and metabolic acidosis. The effect of sedative drug administration is not
      clear, as studies has been inconclusive.

      Even though studies regarding the impact of sleep deprivation on development of delirium
      have been inconclusive, there is no doubt that delirious patients have a disturbed
      sleep-wake cycle, sleep architecture and circadian rhythm.

      At the intensive care unit at the Department of Anesthesiology at Køge Hospital, three out
      of nine rooms have a simulated circadian light installed. The idea is that this light rhythm
      may help to keep a natural circadian rhythm, minimizing the risk of delirium.

      With this descriptive and retrospective cohort study, the investigators therefore want to
      describe the incidence and possible risk- and preventive factors of delirium for the
      participants (ICU patients at Køge Hospital), and with a special focus on the possible
      effect of imitated circadian light..
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients >18 years of age admitted to the ICU at Køge Hospital in the study period

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Richmond Agitation Sedation Score (RASS): -4 or -5 during the whole study period

          -  No CAM-ICU scores during the ICU stay

          -  Unable to communicate in Danish (aphasic, deaf, non-Danish speaking, severe brain
             damage)

          -  Severe dementia documented in electronic patient charts (OPUS)

          -  Patients not receiving active treatment (moribund patients)
