TITLE:
      Preventing Acute Chest Syndrome by Transfusion Feasibility Study
SUMMARY:
      Acute chest syndrome (ACS) is similar to severe pneumonia and is a common cause of
      hospitalizations for people with sickle cell disease (SCD). Blood transfusions are one
      treatment option for ACS. High levels of an enzyme called secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2)
      may be present in people before they develop ACS. This study will determine how well sPLA2
      levels can predict the onset of ACS and whether identifying high sPLA2 levels allows enough
      time to prevent ACS with blood transfusions. Results from this study will help to determine
      the feasibility of conducting a larger study that would further examine the use of sPLA2
      levels and blood transfusions to prevent ACS in people with SCD.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      SCD is an inherited blood disorder, and symptoms include anemia, infections, organ damage,
      and intense episodes of pain, which are called "sickle cell crises." ACS, characterized by
      fever, respiratory distress, and lung tissue damage, is the second most common cause of
      hospitalization and the leading cause of death among people with SCD. Most people with SCD
      will experience at least one episode of ACS, and repeated episodes can result in progressive
      lung disease. ACS can appear suddenly and often requires immediate hospitalization and
      treatment, which can include blood transfusions. People with elevated blood levels of sPLA2
      may be at risk for developing ACS, and this enzyme is often detectable before the onset of
      ACS symptoms. The purpose of this study is to examine the use of sPLA2 as a predictor of ACS
      and to determine whether subsequent blood transfusions can be administered early enough to
      prevent the onset of ACS in people with SCD who are at risk for ACS. Study researchers will
      also assess the feasibility of conducting a larger study that would further examine the
      effectiveness of using sPLA2 levels and blood transfusions to prevent ACS.

      This study will involve two parts. In the first part of the study, participants with SCD who
      are admitted to the hospital with an acute sickle cell pain event will be randomly assigned
      to receive either a single blood transfusion or standard care for ACS and no blood
      transfusion. All participants will be closely monitored while in the hospital for the
      development of ACS, and study researchers will review participants' medical records. All
      participants will undergo daily blood collections, which will include testing for sPLA2
      levels, and at least two chest x-rays. Twenty-eight days after hospital discharge, all
      participants will attend a follow-up study visit for blood collection, again to determine
      sPLA2 levels.

      In the second part of the study, participants who are not eligible or who do not choose to
      participate in the first part of the study will be enrolled into an observational group.
      These participants will receive standard care for ACS, but will not receive a blood
      transfusion. They will undergo daily blood collection during their hospital stay and at
      least one chest x-ray. While participants are in the hospital and 28 days after discharge,
      study researchers will review participants' medical records.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria for the Observational and Trial Cohorts:

          -  Hemoglobin diagnosis of SS (two copies of the hemoglobin S gene), SC (one copy of the
             hemoglobin S gene and one copy of the hemoglobin C gene), or S-β thalassemia (β+ or
             β0)

          -  No clinically apparent ACS

          -  No prior participation in either part of the study

        Inclusion Criteria for the Trial Cohort, in addition to the above criteria:

          -  sPLA2 level greater than 100 ng/mL within the same 24-hour window that coincides with
             fever and chest radiograph negative for new pulmonary infiltrate within the last 12
             hours of the 24-hour window

          -  Fever greater than 38.0º C within the same 24-hour window that coincides with
             elevated sPLA2 level (greater than 100 ng/mL) and chest radiograph negative for new
             pulmonary infiltrate within the last 12 hours of the 24-hour window

          -  Chest radiograph negative for new pulmonary infiltrate within the last 12 hours of
             the 24-hour window of an abnormal sPLA2 level and fever

          -  Hemoglobin levels equal or less than 10 g/dL at time of study entry

          -  Informed consent of parent(s) or legal guardian; informed consent or assent of
             participant as applicable

        Exclusion Criteria for Observational and Trial Cohorts:

          -  Existing diagnosis of a new pulmonary infiltrate diagnosed by chest radiography
             (pleural effusion not obscuring lung parenchyma will not exclude the person from the
             study)

          -  Any coexisting medical condition for which the physician feels that a transfusion may
             be needed within 24 hours (e.g., severe anemia, stroke)

          -  Red Blood Cell (RBC) transfusion in the 60 days before study entry

          -  Unwillingness to sign consent form, or if a minor, unwillingness of parent/guardian
             to sign consent form

          -  Treatment with any investigational drug or device in the 30 days before study entry
             (hydroxyurea is allowable)

          -  History of alloimmunization that would prevent the participant from receiving blood
             within 8 hours of eligibility for study entry or history of a life-threatening
             transfusion reaction

          -  Objection to transfusion for religious or other reasons from either the participant
             or guardian

          -  History of treatment with systemic steroids within 1 week of study entry (inhaled
             steroids are acceptable)

          -  Pregnant
