TITLE:
      Pragmatic Ischaemic Stroke Thrombectomy Evaluation
SUMMARY:
      Ischaemic strokes (those caused by blockage in an artery in the brain caused by a blood
      clot) can be treated with very early use of clot-busting (thrombolytic) drugs to attempt to
      restore the blood supply and limit the damage, resulting in an increased proportion of
      people making a recovery to independence after stroke. However, drug treatment only succeed
      in restoring blood flow in a minority of people with clots in the larger arteries (10-25%
      depending on the size of the blood vessel) and these people also have the most severe
      strokes and highest risk of death or dependence as a result of the stroke. Current best
      treatment is therefore least effective in the group with the most severe strokes. Devices
      that can be fed through the blood vessels to either remove or break up the blood clot in the
      brain vessels can open this type of large artery blockage. However, using these devices is a
      highly skilled procedure and it takes some time both to set up the necessary facilities
      (including anaesthetic, nurses and medical support) and to reach the blockage. The extra
      time that is required to use these devices may mean that brain tissue is already
      irreversibly damaged. If so, then an individual patient cannot benefit and indeed may be
      harmed by opening the artery. There are no completed clinical trials comparing the outcome
      in people treated with standard stroke treatment and those treated with devices. PISTE is a
      randomised, controlled trial to test whether additional mechanical thrombectomy device
      treatment improves functional outcome in patients with large artery occlusion who are given
      IV thrombolytic drug treatment as standard care.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Clinical diagnosis of supratentorial acute ischaemic stroke

          -  Male or nonpregnant female ≥18 years of age

          -  Clinically significant neurological deficit and NIHSS score ≥6.

          -  Eligible for IV rtPA according to standard guidelines and able to be commenced on IV
             treatment <4.5h after symptom onset.

          -  Enrolment, randomisation and procedure commencement (groin puncture) possible within
             90 minutes of the start of IV rtPA treatment (groin puncture maximum 5.5h after
             stroke onset).

          -  Occlusion of the main middle cerebral artery (MCA) trunk, MCA bifurcation or
             intracranial internal carotid artery(carotidT, M1 or single proximal M2 branch)
             demonstrated on CTA, MRA, or DSA.

          -  Interventional device delivery (guide catheter placed beyond aortic arch and angio
             obtained) can be achieved within 6 hours of onset of the stroke.

          -  Consent of patient or representative.

          -  Independent prior to the stroke (estimated mRS 02)

          -  Expected to be able to be followed up at 3 months

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  CT evidence of intracranial haemorrhage, or evidence of extensive established
             hypodensity on CT.

          -  Clinical history suggestive of subarachnoid haemorrhage even if CT normal.

          -  Known vascular access contraindications e.g. femoral bypass surgery, tight
             ipsilateral carotid stenosis, unsuitable proximal vascular anatomy likely to render
             endovascular catheterisation difficult or impossible.

          -  Extracranial ICA occlusion or basilar artery occlusion

          -  Alternative intracranial pathology potentially responsible for the new symptoms

          -  Medical comorbidities which would preclude safe cerebral vessel catheterisation or
             which are expected to limit life expectancy to <3 months (eg severe cardiac, renal or
             hepatic failure, significant coagulopathy, metastatic malignancy)

          -  Known allergy to radiological contrast
