TITLE:
      Cooling Leg and Foot Ulcer Skin Post Healing to Prevent Ulcer Recurrence
SUMMARY:
      The goal of this study is to test MUSTCOOL, a home-based self-monitoring and self-management
      ulcer prevention intervention for patients with newly healed chronic venous leg and diabetic
      foot ulcers. Almost 90% of ulcers recur within 3 months of healing. During the six-month
      randomized clinic trial, skin temperature will be monitored daily, a maintenance dose of
      cooling gel pack or placebo will be applied three times weekly to the affected skin, and a
      bolus dose of cooling will be applied for 5 consecutive days if skin temperature becomes
      elevated. Outcomes on the incidence of leg ulcer recurrence, pain, physical activity and
      quality of life will be measured.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The goal of this randomized control trial is to test a patient directed self-monitoring and
      self-management intervention aimed at preventing the recurrence of chronic venous leg and
      diabetic foot ulcers using skin temperature and cryotherapy (cooling). This MUSTCOOL study
      is a novel ulcer prevention strategy for patients at highest risk for developing chronic
      ulcers; those with a previous history. The aims are to compare a cooling treatment to a
      placebo to determine the outcomes on ulcer recurrence, pain, physical activity and quality
      of life.

      Individuals with newly healed chronic ulcers will be invited to participate in MUSTCOOL's
      two component intervention:

        1. self monitoring skin temperature over targeted "hot spots" daily with an infrared
           thermometer; and

        2. maintenance cooling with a cooling pack (or placebo pack) placed over the "hot spot"
           three times each week for 30 minutes. If the temperature of the "hot spot" becomes
           elevated 2°F above baseline (average of 30 days of daily temperature readings) for 2
           days in a row, a bolus regimen of 5 consecutive daily, 30 minute applications of the
           cooling or placebo pack will be implemented. The safety and side effects will be
           monitored, however, there have been no reported adverse events reported in our previous
           cryotherapy studies.

      This study was designed as a chronic ulcer prevention intervention that targets the
      remodeling phase, the final repair process of healing after chronic ulcer closure. The skin
      environment is particularly vulnerable to ulcer recurrence due to a persistent aberrant
      inflammatory state. The previous research conducted by the study team has demonstrated that
      cooling this skin reduces the abnormal metabolic activity, protecting it against ulcer
      recurrence. Recent advancements in infrared technology allow us to take images of the affect
      skin to identify the area that has the highest temperature or vulnerable "hot spot". These
      "hot spots" will be self monitored by patients with newly healed ulcers in the home with an
      infrared thermometer that date and time stamps each reading. The study's outcomes on
      physical activity will be evaluated with an accelerometer. It is hypothesized that by
      improving the skin environment and reducing pain, patients will more likely be physically
      active and have better quality of life, all measurable goals for this study.

      This prevention strategy will be evaluated over six months in 180 patients, 90 of whom will
      be randomized to receive the cooling pack and 90 the placebo. The goal is to test this
      non-pharmacological, non-invasive clinical intervention as a tailored self-management
      strategy to prevent chronic ulcer recurrence. It will also determine alleviation of symptoms
      such as pain, and the debilitating effects on physical activity and quality of life.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Newly healed leg or diabetic foot ulcer within past 7 - 14 days

          -  Ankle brachial index 0.8- 1.3mmHg (rule out absence of arterial disease)

          -  Willing to wear compression stockings and appropriate footwear

          -  Working freezer

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Open leg or foot ulcers

          -  Cognitive impairment: unable to recall 2 or more words or draw clock Mini-Cog™ for
             cognitive impairment

          -  Chronic inflammatory or vascular conditions where blood flow of skin may be impaired
             such as Lupus erythematosus, Raynaud's, scleroderma, end stage renal disease, chronic
             regional pain syndrome, multiple sclerosis, hypersensitivity to cold, on chemotherapy

          -  Unable to preform required protocol activities without assistance (return
             demonstration to study staff)
