TITLE:
      Ivabradine and Post-revascularisation Microcirculatory Dysfunction
SUMMARY:
      The aim of the study is to test whether, in patients with angina and flow limiting
      epicardial coronary artery disease, pre-treatment with Ivabradine, as opposed to beta
      blockers, will reduce post percutaneous coronary intervention induced microvascular
      dysfunction.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      We will be recruiting patients with stable angina referred for percutaneous intervention
      (PCI) due to flow limiting coronary artery disease. All patients will be on an existing beta
      blocker prescription (standard first line angina therapy). Our hypothesis is that Ivabradine
      will attenuate microvascular dysfunction post PCI when compared to standard beta-blocker
      pre-treatment. We intend to test this in a randomised, open-label parallel arm study with a
      direct comparison between Ivabradine and beta-blockers (standard therapy). Patients will be
      randomised to receive either Ivabradine (and stop beta blockers) or continue beta blockers
      for 6 weeks prior to the PCI procedure. The primary endpoint will be IMR (index of
      microvascular resistance) post PCI, as a marker of microvascular dysfunction and procedural
      related myocardial injury. IMR is a potent marker of adverse outcome in STEMI patients and
      in ACS after PCI. Although this has yet to be assessed in the elective setting, a reduction
      in IMR with Ivabradine may indicate a potential to improve outcomes and lessen iatrogenic
      microvascular dysfunction post PCI. IMR is assessed using thermodilution catheters placed
      distal to the coronary stenosis and by producing hyperaemia. To assess the medium term
      effects on the microcirculation post PCI all patients will have a stress perfusion cardiac
      MRI 12 weeks post procedure. The secondary endpoint will be proportion of patients with
      coronary flow reserve (CFR) <2.0 in PCI territory (regional myocardial blood flow at
      hyperaemia by intravenous adenosine infusion compared to rest). We will also be assessing
      CFI (collateral flow index), as promotion of the collateral system is one method by which
      Ivabradine may lessen procedural related myocardial injury, and ΔIMR as the difference
      between IMR pre and post-PCI.

      The measurement of cardiac troponins and use of cardiac MRI will facilitate the
      identification of peri-procedural myocardial injury and procedural related myocardial
      infarction as further secondary end points. The Seattle Angina Questionnaire will be used at
      3 intervals to assess symptoms throughout the study. The total study length for each patient
      will be 18 weeks.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Symptoms of Angina Pectoris

          2. Angiographic evidence of epicardial coronary artery stenosis referred for PCI

          3. Flow limiting lesion (Fractional Flow Reserve ≤0.80) in one of following locations
             (as defined in SYNTAX trial89):

               1. Proximal or mid left anterior descending artery (LAD)

               2. Proximal or mid dominant right coronary artery (RCA)

               3. Proximal left circumflex artery (LCx) or 1ST Obtuse marginal Vessel

          4. Existing beta blocker prescription

          5. Echocardiogram performed within preceding 12 months

          6. Patient consent

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Previous myocardial infarction (MI) in target vessel myocardial territory or any MI
             in preceding 12 months (defined by patient history, ECG changes and evidence of
             regional wall motion abnormalities on echocardiography)

          2. FFR>0.80 in target vessel at time of procedure

          3. Requirement for Multi-vessel intervention in a single procedure

          4. Any chronic total occlusion (100% epicardial occlusion) on angiography

          5. Distal coronary artery stenosis or that affecting non-dominant RCA

          6. Heart Rate <60 bpm at inclusion (assessed by 12 lead ECG after minimum 10 minutes
             rest period)

          7. Any rhythm other than sinus rhythm

          8. Sick sinus syndrome or high grade atrio-ventricular block

          9. Permanent Pacemaker in situ

         10. Congenital QT Syndrome

         11. Intolerance or allergy to beta-blockers

         12. Intolerance to Ivabradine

         13. Additional (other than angina pectoris) indication for beta-blocker treatment e.g.
             ventricular tachycardia

         14. Concurrent required use of rate-limiting drugs other than beta-blockers

         15. The necessity of combination therapy with Ivabradine and bisoprolol to achieve heart
             rate control

         16. Contraindication to Magnetic Resonance Imaging or IV adenosine

         17. Severe impairment of renal function (eGFR<30ml/min)

         18. Severe Liver Disease (Any worse than Grade A by Child-Pugh Classification)
