TITLE:
      Diabetes and Heart Disease Risk in Blacks
SUMMARY:
      It is unknown if obesity contributes to the development of heart disease in African American
      men and women.

      This study was created to determine whether there is a relationship between sex and body
      size and the incidence of heart disease in African American men and women. Researchers will
      attempt to associate obesity with the presence of heart disease risk factors. Risk factors
      that will be studied include; total body fat, body fat distribution, fat content of the
      blood (triglyceride concentration, low density lipoproteins [LDL], and high density
      lipoproteins [HDL]), how fast fat is removed from the blood, and how well insulin works in
      the body.

      Scientific studies have shown that obesity and increased levels of fat content in the blood
      are important risk factors for heart disease in Caucasian women. However, similar studies in
      African American women have failed to show the same correlation. In fact, it appears that
      African American women in all three body weight groupings, nonobese, overweight, and obese
      experience high death rates due to heart disease. In addition, prior research has shown that
      obese African American men tend to have elevated levels of fat in the blood while African
      American women have normal blood fat levels. Therefore, if high levels of triglycerides (fat
      found in the blood) are not seen in non-diabetic obese African American women, it cannot be
      considered a risk factor in this population. This suggests that studies conducted on
      Caucasian women may not provide insight into heart disease risk factors in African American
      women.

      The study will take 120 healthy nondiabetic African American men and women (ages 18-50)
      grouped by sex (60 men and 60 women) and body mass index 3 subgroups; nonobese, overweight
      and obese). Diabetes undeniably increases the risk of heart disease. Therefore patients
      suffering from diabetes will not be included in the study. Candidates for the study will
      undergo a series of tests and examinations over 5 outpatient visits. Subjects will have body
      fat analyses, resting energy expenditure measurements, an EKG (electrocardiogram), and
      specific blood tests.

      Researchers believe this study will provide significant insight into the causes of obesity
      and heart disease in African Americans.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This study is designed to investigate in blacks the relationship of risk for diabetes and
      heart disease from obesity plasma glucose and triglyceride concentrations and the
      triglyceride related risk factors of small dense low density lipoprotein (LDL), high density
      lipoprotein (HDL) and central obesity.

      The Framingham Study demonstrated that obesity and elevated glucose and triglyceride levels
      are important risk factors for coronary artery disease in white women. However, studies that
      have had significant participation of black women such as the Charleston Heart Study, failed
      to show a relationship of obesity or triglyceride to coronary artery disease mortality in
      black women. In fact, black women independent of body weight or triglyceride levels
      experience high mortality from coronary artery disease. Our earlier research has
      demonstrated that obese black men have elevated triglyceride levels but obese black women
      have normal triglyceride levels. Consequently if elevated triglyceride levels do not occur
      in obese nondiabetic black women, then elevated triglyceride levels may not represent a
      major cardiovascular risk for black women.

      The study, Diabetes and Heart Disease Risk in Blacks, is designed to determine the role of
      obesity, glucose and triglyceride on risk for heart disease in blacks. For this study of
      blacks, we will study 2 groups, African Americans and Black Africans living in the United
      States. African Americans must self-identify as African American, be born in the United
      States and have parents who self-identify as African American and were born in the United
      States. The second group will be blacks living in the United States but were born in Africa
      and whose parents were born in Africa.

      We will recruit 1132 healthy, non-diabetic individuals (546 men, 586 women), age range
      18-65, and body mass index (3 subgroups: nonobese, overweight and obese). We need to recruit
      more women than men because triglyceride and glucose levels are lower in women than men.
      Therefore a larger number of women are needed to see an effect. In 3 outpatient visits to
      the Clinical Center, participants will have body fat analyses, an electrocardiogram, an oral
      glucose tolerance test, questionnaires about sleep and stress and an intravenous glucose
      tolerance test. This study has the potential to provide significant insight and lead to the
      development of programs that help decrease diabetes and cardiovascular risk in blacks.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      -  INCLUSION CRITERIA:

        Ethnicity: African Americans

        To enroll participants must self-identify as African Americans and be born in the United
        States, with American born parents or be born in Africa with African born parents. In the
        future, we plan to expand the study to include other groups which self-identify as African
        Americans (i.e. AfroCarribeans and Hispanic blacks).

        Age: The age range of the participants will be between 18 and 50 years.

        Medical History: To participate in the study subjects should identify themselves as
        healthy.

        Menstrual History: Women must give a history of regular monthly cycles (24-35 days) for at
        least one year.

        EXCLUSION CRITERIA:

        African American Ethnicity other than American or West African ancestry. In the future, we
        will expand the study to include other African American groups such as individuals of
        Afro-Caribbean and Hispanic blacks.

        Medications: People who take medications that are known to alter the parameters which are
        under investigation in this study will be excluded. An example would be medications used
        to treat hyperlipidemia such as statins, niacin, bile acid sequestrants and fibric acid
        derivatives. Subjects on thyroid hormone replacement will be included if their TSH is
        normal.

        Diabetes: Because diabetes affects insulin sensitivity and TG levels all people with
        diabetes even if the diabetes is controlled with diet alone will not be enrolled in the
        study.

        Breastfeeding: Women who are breastfeeding or have an infant that is less than four months
        of age will be excluded. This is because the physiologic changes associated with
        breastfeeding or recent childbirth affect the parameters under study.

        Menstrual History: Women with a history of irregular menstrual cycles in the year prior to
        the study will be excluded. Due to the requirement for regular menses, women in the
        following categories, regardless of age will be excluded: history of hysterectomy, history
        of bilateral oophorectomy, use of Norplant or Depo-Provera for contraception.

        History of bleeding diathesis
