TITLE:
      Home Hypnotherapy for Refractory Functional Chest Pain: A Pilot Study
SUMMARY:
      The primary aim is to develop and test the feasibility of a standardized digital audio
      home-hypnotherapy (HHT) program for patients with refractory functional chest pain (FCP).

      The secondary aims of this study are:

        1. To obtain pilot data to assess the magnitude of the treatment effect of self-hypnosis
           in refractory FCP for an anticipated future, larger treatment trial;

        2. To determine the stability of the treatment effect of HHT in refractory FCP;

        3. To assess the relationship between response to HHT and psychological factors; and

        4. To assess the relationship between response to HHT and symptomatic dimensions of chest
           pain (severity, frequency, and duration).

        5. To assess the difference
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Eligible patients with refractory FCP will be randomized to one of 2 arms: the active
      treatment group, who will receive the HHT program; or a control group. Patients in the
      active treatment group will receive the 12-week digital audio HHT program. This protocol
      consists of 7 sessions, each approximately 30-40 minutes, administered every 2 weeks, for a
      cumulative 12 weeks of treatment, along with a shorter (approximately 12 minute) session
      administered daily. Patients in the control group will receive a digital audio educational
      program. Subjects in both groups will be assessed at baseline, 4-6 weeks into treatment, at
      the end of the treatment, and 3 months after conclusion of the program. Global change in
      symptoms will be assessed with a 7-point Likert scale. Patients will be considered to
      respond if they have significant improvement on the Likert scale at the post-treatment
      visit. Patients will complete a chest pain symptom diary, the SCL-90 and the Coping
      Strategies Questionnaire-Catastrophizing subscale to assess psychological features, and the
      SF-36 as a measure of Health Related Quality of Life (HRQOL).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age 18 to 80, male or female.

          -  Patients must fulfill the Rome III criteria for Functional Chest Pain of Presumed
             Esophageal Origin for the previous 3 months (with symptom onset at least 6 months
             before diagnosis), including all of the following:

               -  Midline chest pain or discomfort that is not of burning quality

               -  Absence of evidence that gastroesophageal reflux is the cause of the symptom

               -  Absence of histopathology-based esophageal motility disorders

          -  Persistent symptoms despite a trial of antidepressant therapy, as defined by either:

               -  chest pain despite at least a continuous 4-week trial of at least one
                  antidepressant within the last 6 months; or

               -  intolerance of at least one antidepressant within the last 6 months.

          -  Negative cardiac evaluation (negative cardiac stress test or negative coronary
             angiogram)

          -  Negative gastrointestinal evaluation for cause of the pain, defined by absence of Los
             Angeles grade C or D erosive esophagitis on endoscopy, persistent chest pain on PPI
             therapy, and no association of chest pain with reflux episodes on an ambulatory pH or
             pH-impedance study, defined as a symptom index <50% or symptom association
             probability <95% for chest pain .

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Severe co-morbid illness (cardiac, pulmonary, renal, hematologic, hepatic)

          -  Prior treatment with hypnosis/hypnotherapy for a medical condition

          -  Prior major thoracic surgery

          -  Prior diagnosis of or treatment for dissociative disorders, post-traumatic stress
             disorder, borderline personality disorder, or other psychiatric disorders that
             include psychotic features

          -  Pregnancy or planned pregnancy within the upcoming 3 months

          -  Inability or unwillingness to give informed consent
