TITLE:
      Safety and Efficacy Study of a Vaccine Against Enterotoxigenic Escherichia Coli (ETEC) to Prevent Moderate to Severe Diarrhea
SUMMARY:
      This is a research study about an experimental (investigational) vaccine called ACE527.
      ACE527 is a vaccine that is being made to prevent disease from a germ called enterotoxigenic
      Escherichia coli (ETEC). This germ causes diarrhea, largely in children living in developing
      countries and in travelers to those countries. One purpose of this study is to see if the
      vaccine is safe and develops an immune response. Another purpose is to see if it prevents
      people from getting sick when exposed to the ETEC germ. This ETEC germ is also experimental
      (investigational).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase II vaccination and
      challenge study designed to assess the protective efficacy of the ACE 527 vaccine, as well
      as collect expanded safety and immunogenicity data. The study will be carried out in two
      phases. In the initial vaccination phase, up to 72 subjects will be randomized 1:1 to
      receive either ACE527 or placebo on an outpatient basis. Vaccine and placebo preparations
      will be given orally. Following vaccination, subjects will be followed as out-patients for
      safety using diary card surveillance, for vaccine shedding by qualitative stool culture
      (i.e. presence or absence) and for the development of local and systemic antibody responses
      to the ACE527 vaccine strains. In the subsequent inpatient challenge phase, up to 56
      vaccinated subjects will be admitted as inpatients and challenged with the ETEC strain,
      H10407. The challenge dose will be administered orally.After challenge, subjects will be
      monitored for diarrhea and other signs/symptoms of enteric illness by daily medical checks,
      vital sign determinations, grading and weighing of all stools. Monitoring for fecal shedding
      of the challenge ETEC strain H10407 will occur daily, after challenge, while in-patient.
      Local and systemic antibody responses to the challenge ETEC strain H10407 will also be
      assessed. All subjects will be treated with Abx.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria:

          -  Male or female age ≥18 and ≤ 50 years.

          -  General good health, without clinically significant medical history, physical
             examination findings or clinical laboratory abnormalities per clinical judgment of
             PI.

          -  Negative serum pregnancy test before first (visit V0) and before challenge (visit C0)
             for female subjects of childbearing potential. Females of childbearing potential must
             agree to use an efficacious hormonal or barrier method of birth control during the
             study. Abstinence is acceptable. Female subjects unable to bear children must have
             this documented (e.g. tubal ligation or hysterectomy) or must have negative pregnancy
             tests.

          -  Willingness to participate in the study after all aspects of the protocol have been
             explained and written informed consent obtained.

          -  Completion of a training session and demonstrated comprehension of the protocol
             procedures, knowledge of ETEC-associated illness, and by passing a written
             examination.

          -  Availability for the study duration, including all planned follow-up visits.

        Exclusion criteria:

          -  Presence of a significant medical or psychiatric condition which in the opinion of
             the investigator precludes participation in the study. Some medical conditions which
             are adequately treated and stable would not preclude entry into the study. These
             conditions might include stable asthma controlled with inhalers or mild hypertension
             stably controlled with a single agent.

          -  Significant abnormalities in screening hematology, serum chemistry or urinalysis as
             determined by PI or PI in consultation with the MM and sponsor.

          -  Presence in the serum of HIV antibody, HBsAg, or HCV antibody.

          -  Evidence of IgA deficiency (serum IgA < 7 mg/dl or limit of detection of assay).

          -  Evidence of current excessive alcohol consumption or drug dependence.

          -  Evidence of impaired immune function.

          -  BMI <19, >34

          -  Recent vaccination or receipt of an investigational product (within 30 days before
             vaccination).

          -  Intention to donate blood or blood products for one month following the completion of
             study participation (note: The Red Cross will not allow blood donations for 1 year
             following participation in an investigational research study).

          -  Any other criteria which, in the investigator's opinion, would compromise the ability
             of the subject to participate in the study, the safety of the study, or the results
             of the study

          -  Working as a food handler, in child-care or as a healthcare worker with direct
             patient contact.

          -  Have household contacts who are <2 years old or >80 years old or infirm or
             immunocompromised (for reasons including corticosteroid therapy, HIV infection,
             cancer chemotherapy, or other chronic debilitating disease).

          -  Abnormal stool pattern (fewer than 3 per week or more than 3 per day).

          -  Regular use of laxatives, antacids, or other agents to lower stomach acidity.

          -  Use of any medication known to affect the immune function (e.g., corticosteroids and
             others) within 30 days preceding the first vaccination or planned use during the
             active study period.

          -  Known allergy to two of the following antibiotics: quinolones,
             trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and penicillin.

          -  Symptoms consistent with Traveler's Diarrhea concurrent with travel to countries
             where ETEC infection is endemic (most of the developing world) within two years prior
             to dosing, OR planned travel to endemic countries during the length of the study.

          -  Vaccination for or ingestion of ETEC, cholera, or LT toxin within 3 years prior to
             dosing.

          -  Use of antibiotics during the 7 days before dosing or proton pump inhibitors, H2
             blockers or antacids within 48 hours prior to dosing.

          -  History of diarrhea in the 7 days prior to vaccination (outpatient diarrhea is
             defined as ≥ 3 unformed loose stools in 24 hours).
