TITLE:
      Early Invasive Versus Conservative Therapy in Women With an Acute Coronary Syndrome
SUMMARY:
      The aim of this research is to evaluate the effect of early invasive therapy and appropriate
      revascularization compared with conservative management and selective revascularization
      among women with an acute coronary syndrome.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This study aims to enroll 1,000 women who present with AcuteCoronarySyndorme ( ACS).
      Patients will be identified through screening of all women admitted for chest pain, and
      those women with positive cardiac enzymes after operative procedures. After receiving
      permission to approach the potential subjects, trained and delegated study personnel will
      present the study to the patient. The informed consent process will be completed by the
      study coordinator, PI or co-investigator. The patient will have all procedures, risks and
      benefits explained and offered time to read and review the informed consent form. They will
      be given adequate time to ask questions, consult with family members or primary physicians.
      Specifically, written informed consent will be obtained in the emergency department or in
      the cardiology ward/unit before the patient is sedated/in the catheterization laboratory. .
      When a patient consents to participate in the study, their treatment assignment will be
      randomly determined by opening a sealed envelope that contains one of two treatment
      strategies. The blinding envelopes will be created by the Biostatistics group and will be
      sealed.

      Once informed written consent is obtained (see accompanying flow chart), each patient will
      be randomly assigned to early invasive therapy versus conservative management. All patients
      will be administered aspirin 325 mg, clopidogrel 600 mg, and atorvastatin 80 mg.
      Anti-thrombin therapy (unfractionated heparin or bivalirudin according to physician
      discretion) will be administered intravenously. If anti-thrombin therapy was administered
      prior to randomization, this agent will be continued through catheterization and titrated if
      necessary to achieve desired effect.

      Patients assigned to an early invasive strategy will undergo coronary angiography within 48
      hours and have percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting
      performed as soon as possible during the initial hospitalization if deemed appropriate. The
      choice of intervention or surgery will be determined by the operator according to coronary
      anatomy and consistent with current practice guidelines. For example, disease of the left
      main trunk, or multi-vessel disease would generally be expected to be referred for surgical
      revascularization. Patients who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention can receive a
      glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor (i.e. abciximab bolus by intra-coronary or intra-venous
      route (0.25 mg per kg), followed by infusion (0.125 µg per kg per minute for 12 hours).
      Upfront use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors is discouraged. Eptifibatide or tirofiban
      can be used instead of abciximab according to operator discretion. Elective percutaneous
      coronary intervention on non-culprit vessels, in either study arm, can take place sometime
      after the index procedure with the goal to achieve complete revascularization. Such staged
      procedures will not be adjudicated as an urgent need for revascularization.

      Patients assigned to conservative management will be treated with anti-anginal medications,
      as well as aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin, and other guideline recommended medicines.
      Anti-thrombin therapy will be continued for no more than 48 hours. Conservative therapy will
      continue during this time, unless the patient has refractory angina, hemodynamic or
      electrical instability, left ventricular dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction <
      45%), or significant ischemia on predischarge stress testing. Patients will have an
      echocardiogram to determine left ventricle function. Stress testing will be performed by
      adenosine SPECT if there is no left ventricular dysfunction by echocardiography. Patients
      with any high risk findings, such as refractory chest pain, left ventricular ejection
      fraction < 45%, or a large burden of ischemia on stress testing will remain in the hospital
      to undergo cardiac catheterization.

      Patients in both groups will be treated with lifelong aspirin, 12 months of clopidogrel, in
      addition to atorvastatin and other guideline recommended therapies. A shorter duration of
      clopidogrel can be recommended in select cases according to treating physician discretion.

      Specific data for acquisition:

      Protected health information will be accessed by the practitioners normally involved in the
      patient's care during their hospitalization. Research demographics will be obtained by the
      research coordinator by interviewing the patient and by chart review. After hospital
      discharge, the research coordinator will contact the patient at specified intervals to
      determine if an endpoint has been met. Evidence that an endpoint occurred would require
      additional supplemental chart review by the research coordinator.

      Patient demographics: age, height, weight, body mass index, medications at randomization,
      pertinent medical/surgical/family/social history: for example hypertension,
      hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, current tobacco use, history of: prior myocardial
      infarction, percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting. This data
      will be gathered by the research coordinator through patient reporting and chart review.

      Procedural: Duration of ischemic symptoms from onset until randomization,
      electrocardiographic changes, elevated cardiac biomarkers, elevated NT-pro-BNP, procedural
      success defined as Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction flow 3, drug-eluting stent use,
      glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor use, intra-procedural activated clotting time, closure
      device, sheath size, micropuncture access.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Women age 18 years or older

          2. Non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome (defined as new onset chest discomfort that
             occurs at rest or with low levels of activity/or emotion within the preceding 48
             hours) with either:

               1. elevated troponin T (≥ 0.03 ng per milliliter),

               2. elevated creatinine kinase MB-isoenzyme (≥ 5.0 ng per milliliter)

               3. elevated NT-pro-BNP (≥ 450 pg per milliliter),

               4. ST-segment depression (≥ 0.5 mm)

               5. or TIMI risk score (> 2)

          3. women who have elevated cardiac enzymes after non-cardiac surgery will also be
             considered.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. ST-elevation myocardial infarction,

          2. cardiogenic shock,

          3. congestive heart failure,

          4. hemodynamic instability,

          5. use of fibrinolytic therapy in the last 96 hours,

          6. current bleeding or bleeding disorder within the last 3 months that required
             transfusion,

          7. pregnancy,

          8. contraindication to any study medication. i.e.heparin, clopidogrel, or glycoprotein
             IIb/III inhibitor,

          9. PCI in the last 6 months,

         10. prior CABG,

         11. inability to provide written informed consent.
