TITLE:
      Enoximone Plus Extended-Release Metoprolol Succinate in Subjects With Advanced Chronic Heart Failure
SUMMARY:
      Beta-blocker medications have been shown to improve heart function and prolong the lives of
      patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). Some people with advanced CHF have difficulty
      taking beta-blocker medications due to troublesome side effects, such as low blood pressure
      and/or low heart rate, severe tiredness, dizziness, or shortness of breath. In other words,
      they have difficulty tolerating beta-blocker medications. The purpose of this study is to
      determine if enoximone can improve a patient's ability to tolerate a beta-blocker
      medication.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Over the last decade, it has become evident that certain beta-blocking agents
      (beta-blockers) exert a favorable effect on the natural history of mild to moderate chronic
      heart failure (CHF), including reducing mortality and hospitalization rate. However, as
      heart failure becomes more severe, beta-blockers become difficult to administer because of
      myocardial depression leading to hemodynamic intolerance. A recent clinical study
      demonstrated that subjects who could not tolerate the beta-blocker metoprolol experienced
      improved tolerability when low-dose, oral enoximone was administered prior to the
      introduction of metoprolol and during ongoing treatment. This study will investigate the
      hypotheses that by stabilizing subjects on enoximone first, advanced CHF subjects who are
      intolerant of beta-blockade will be able to 1) tolerate the effects of beta-blocker therapy,
      and 2) have clinical benefit that is due to the combination of both enoximone and
      extended-release metoprolol succinate (ER metoprolol). Support for these hypotheses will be
      sought by demonstrating that, as compared to placebo, low-dose, oral enoximone plus ER
      metoprolol will increase left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), improve symptoms of
      heart failure, and improve submaximal exercise tolerance in subjects with CHF.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria

        In order to be considered an eligible subject, all of the following entry criteria must be
        met:

          -  Subjects must be competent to provide informed written consent. Subjects must sign an
             IRB/IEC approved informed consent form prior to the initiation of any study
             procedures.

          -  Subjects must be 18 years of age or older.

          -  Subjects must have ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy with symptoms of NYHA Class
             III or IV chronic heart failure.

          -  Subjects must have a LVEF of less than or equal to 35%, measured within 60 days of
             the Screening Visit. LVEF must be assessed by radionuclide ventriculography (MUGA).
             If the subject has experienced any cardiovascular events, has undergone any
             interventions, or received any changes in treatment that may have affected LV
             function since the most recent EF measurement, an LVEF measurement must be completed
             prior to the subject being randomized.

          -  Subjects must have a left ventricular end diastolic dimension (LVEDD) of >2.7 cm/m2
             as measured by 2-D ECHO within 12 months of the Screening Visit.

          -  Subjects must be on optimal conventional heart failure therapy (with the exception of
             a beta-blocker), including an ACEI for at least 30 days prior to the Screening Visit,
             or the subject must have had a trial of an ACEI and proven to be intolerant, or the
             subject must be taking an ARB for at least 30 days prior to the Screening Visit or
             proved to be intolerant. Optimal conventional therapy may also include
             spironolactone, digitalis glycosides, diuretics, or other vasodilators.

          -  Subjects must have failed the initiation, or the up-titration, of a beta-blocker drug
             due to hemodynamic intolerance within 12 months prior to the Screening Visit. Failure
             to tolerate beta-blockade for hemodynamic reasons is defined as worsening signs and
             symptoms of chronic heart failure, hypotension accompanied with symptoms, or evidence
             of organ hypoperfusion, which in the judgment of the treating physician precluded
             further treatment with the beta-blocker. This beta-blocker intolerance must have been
             documented prior to Screening, and a narrative description of the intolerance must be
             approved by Myogen prior to Randomization.

        Exclusion criteria

        Subjects who meet any one of the following criteria will be deemed ineligible for
        participation in the study:

          -  Subjects with CHF due to or associated with uncorrected primary valvular disease,
             uncorrected thyroid disease, obstructive/hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, pericardial
             disease, amyloidosis, active myocarditis, malfunctioning artificial heart valve,
             uncorrected congenital heart disease, isolated right-sided heart failure, or primary
             pulmonary hypertension.

          -  Subjects who have undergone a cardiac revascularization, valvular surgery, or
             bi-ventricular resynchronization procedure within 60 days prior to the Screening
             Visit.

          -  Subjects listed for heart transplantation who are expected to be transplanted within
             6 months of randomization.

          -  Subjects who have had a myocardial infarction within 90 days prior to the Screening
             Visit.

          -  Subjects with an ECG recorded at the Screening Visit showing any of the following: 1)
             evidence of transmural ischemia (dynamic ST elevation or ST elevation associated with
             ischemic symptoms), or 2) ventricular tachycardia (VT) or premature ventricular
             complexes (PVCs) associated with symptoms, or 3) VT of greater than or equal to 6
             beats

          -  Subjects with sustained (>15 seconds) VT, unless precipitated by an event such as an
             acute myocardial infarction, induction by catheter placement, or by an
             electrophysiology procedure, or addressed by AICD placement.

          -  Subjects with an AICD that has fired for any ventricular arrhythmia within 90 days of
             the Randomization Visit.

          -  Subjects with a documented diagnosis of angina that meets either of the following
             criteria: 1) angina diagnosed as unstable at any time within the 60 days prior to the
             Screening Visit or 2) angina is the primary symptom that limits daily physical
             activity

          -  Subjects who have had ventricular reduction surgery or cardiac myoplasty.

          -  Subjects on a mechanical assist device.

          -  Subjects with evidence of a concomitant disease that may interfere with the natural
             course of the subject's underlying heart failure for the duration of the trial.

          -  Subjects having a concomitant life-threatening disease for which their life
             expectancy is estimated to be less than one year.

          -  Subjects with uncontrolled insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with a history of
             frequent hypoglycemic episodes or frequent hospitalizations for hyperglycemia.

          -  Subjects on the following concomitant medications at the time of Screening are
             excluded from participating in the study: 1) Calcium antagonists other than
             amlodipine or felodipine; 2) Flecainide, encainide, propafenone, sotalol, dofetilide
             or disopyramide; 3) Subjects receiving i.v. positive inotropic agents within seven
             days of the Screening Visit or Randomization Visit; 4) Subjects receiving a human
             BNP, including nesiritide, within seven days of the Screening Visit or Randomization
             Visit; 5) Subjects receiving oral or i.v. type-III PDE inhibitors within seven days
             of the Screening Visit or Randomization Visit.

          -  Subjects with a contraindication to treatment with a positive inotropic agent
             (defined as a serious adverse event attributed to previous treatment with a positive
             inotrope).

          -  Subjects with a known contraindication to beta-blocker therapy. This may include
             beta-agonist-dependent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma, a heart rate
             <55 BPM, the presence of second- or third-degree heart block without an implanted
             pacemaker, and first-degree heart block with a PR interval >220 milliseconds.

          -  Subjects with active hepatic (screening serum total bilirubin greater than or equal
             to 3.0 mg/dL), renal (screening serum creatinine greater than or equal to 2.0 mg/dL),
             hematologic, gastrointestinal, immunologic, endocrine, metabolic, or central nervous
             system disease, which in the opinion of the Investigator, may adversely affect the
             safety and efficacy of the study drug or the life span of the subject.

          -  Subjects known to abuse or actively abusing alcohol or illicit drugs. Abuse of
             alcohol is defined as the usual daily intake of more than 100 grams of ethanol per
             day, or more than approximately 6 twelve-ounce bottles of beer, one 750 mL bottle of
             wine or 250 mL of 80 proof spirits.

          -  Subjects with a serum potassium <4.0 mEq/L or >5.5 mEq/L at Screening.

          -  Subjects with a serum digoxin of >1.2 ng/mL at Screening are excluded.

          -  Pregnant women and women at risk of becoming pregnant (i.e., not using effective
             methods of birth control).

          -  Subjects who have participated in a clinical trial involving another investigational
             drug or device within 30 days of the Screening Visit or at any time during the study.

          -  Subjects who have demonstrated noncompliance with previous medical regimens.

          -  Subjects who are hospitalized at the time of the Randomization Visit and are not
             hemodynamically stable, or for whom there is an acute cardiac or non-cardiac illness
             that requires further hospitalization.
