TITLE:
      Women's Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate innovative diagnostic methods that will improve the diagnostic reliability of
      cardiovascular testing in evaluation of ischemic heart disease in women. Innovative
      approaches proposed include physiologic or functional measurements such as impaired
      metabolism, perfusion, or endothelial function as well as assessment of epicardial coronary
      arteries by angiography. Other objectives include developing safe, accurate, and cost
      effective diagnostic approaches for evaluating women with suspected ischemic heart disease,
      and determining the frequency of myocardial ischemia in the absence of significant
      epicardial coronary stenosis, as well as the frequency of non-ischemic or non-cardiac chest
      pain. A key aspect of the WISE study is to determine whether evidence of myocardial ischemia
      occurs in the absence of obstructive coronary disease.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Cardiovascular disease exacts a heavy burden on the health of women. Ischemic heart disease
      claims the lives of nearly 250,000 women in the United States each year. Recognition of
      ischemic heart disease in women is a major challenge to the primary care physician.
      Diagnosis of ischemic heart disease requires recognition of clinical symptoms such as chest
      pain, or events such as a myocardial infarction, which are evaluated by a physician who will
      confirm the diagnosis with objective tests. Unfortunately, both symptom recognition and
      diagnostic tests confuse rather than confirm a diagnosis of myocardial ischemia in women.
      Chest pain syndromes suspicious for myocardial ischemia are common in women. Noninvasive
      diagnostic methods which often confirm the diagnosis and assess disease severity in men are
      less reliable in women. This lack of objective data to support the diagnosis of chronic or
      acute myocardial ischemia may influence the physician's decision to further evaluate women
      at risk. With precision in diagnosis, efforts to optimize therapies are hampered.

      The detection of epicardial coronary atherosclerosis is a major objective in clinical
      cardiology. The utility of this approach is well established. However, although the presence
      of atherosclerosis is sufficient to cause myocardial ischemia, whether significant ischemia
      or risk of ischemia exists in the absence of angiographic epicardial stenosis, is not known
      and may be important for women.

      Recent progress in understanding the pathophysiology of myocardial ischemia provides a more
      complex causal pathway than the heretofore notion of fixed atherosclerotic obstructions in
      passive conduits. Diseased arteries which may appear angiographically normal as well as
      arteries with fixed obstructions can respond to vasomotor influences with a detrimental
      amount of vasoconstriction. The endothelium generates vasoactive and anticoagulant factors
      that are important mediators of thrombosis. Cycling hormones may further influence these
      complex interactions. Methods which do not rely solely on fixed obstruction of epicardial
      arteries are not only possible but may be useful to recognize early atherosclerosis or, for
      example, endothelial dysfunction which places the patient at risk for untoward coronary
      events.

      The concept for the study was developed by the Cardiology Advisory Committee in
      collaboration with staff and was approved by the May 1993 National Heart, Lung, and Blood
      Advisory Council. The Request for Proposals was released in April 1994.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The Women's Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) was a four center study designed to evaluate
      ischemic heart disease and its pathophysiology in women. WISE testing focused on three
      areas: 1) optimizing symptom evaluation and diagnostic testing for ischemic heart disease;
      2) exploring mechanisms for symptoms and evidence of myocardial ischemia in the absence of
      epicardial coronary artery disease; 3) evaluating the influence of reproductive hormones on
      symptoms and diagnostic test response. The WISE core data base included demographic and
      clinical data, symptom and psychosocial variables, coronary angiography and ventriculography
      data, blood lipoprotein/homocysteine/lipid peroxidation/genetic/hormone/ phytoestrogen
      analysis, brachial artery reactivity testing, and resting/ambulatory electrocardiographic
      (ECG) monitoring. Site specific complementary methods included physiologic and functional
      cardiovascular assessments of myocardial perfusion and metabolism, ventriculography,
      endothelial vascular function and coronary angiography. Women were followed for at least one
      year to assess clinical events and symptom status. In the Phase I (1996-7), a pilot phase,
      256 women were studied. Phase II has completed enrolling 1008 women in the study. The WISE
      study defined contemporary and comprehensive state-of-the-art diagnostic testing to evaluate
      women with suspected ischemic heart disease, and explore sex specific ischemic heart disease
      pathophysiology.

      The study has been renewed through April, 2005 to extend patient follow-up for a minimum of
      five years. Dr. Kelsey (U01HL64829) of the Data Coordinating Center at the University of
      Pittsburgh will continue the follow-up, develop sex-specific incremental outcome models to
      evaluate the prognostic value of female reproductive variables, assess cost effectiveness of
      the WISE testing techniques, and continue data analyses. Dr. Reis (U01HL64914) will study
      the immunologic basis of coronary disease in women, focusing on the role of inflammation and
      cytokine production. He will measure several cytokines and cytokine-related proteins and
      genotypes in approximately 900 stored samples from WISE participants. Dr. Pepine
      (U01HL64924) will study the renin angiotensin system in coronary microvascular dysfunction,
      focusing on whether polymorphisms of the renin-angiotensin/kallikrein-kinin systems and
      beta-adrenergic receptors polymorphisms are associated with abnormal coronary microvascular
      function determined by coronary flow reserve measurements.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Women over the age of 18 who have suspected ischemic heart disease.
