TITLE:
      Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Clinical Network (ARDSNet)
SUMMARY:
      The purposes of this study are to assess rapidly innovative treatment methods in patients
      with adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) as well as those at risk of developing ARDS
      and to create a network of interactive Critical Care Treatment Groups (CCTGs) to establish
      and maintain the required infrastructure to perform multiple therapeutic trials that may
      involve investigational drugs, approved agents not currently used for treatment of ARDS, or
      treatments currently used but whose efficacy has not been well documented.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      ARDS affects approximately 150,000 people in the United States each year. Despite 20 years
      of research into the mechanisms that cause this syndrome and numerous developments in the
      technology of mechanical ventilation, the mortality has remained greater than 50 percent.
      Many of the patients are young, and to the tragic loss of human life can be added the cost
      to society because these patients spend an average of 2 weeks in intensive care units and
      require multiple high tech procedures. Because of the overwhelming nature of the lung injury
      once it is established, prevention would appear to be the most effective strategy for
      improving the outlook in this condition.

      Basic research has identified numerous inflammatory pathways that are associated with the
      development of ARDS. Agents that block these mediators prolong survival in animals with lung
      injury, and a few of them have been tested in patients. Because of the large number of
      putative mediators and the variety of ways that their action can be blocked, the possibility
      for new drug development is almost infinite. This is an exciting prospect, since it
      envisions the first effective pharmacologic treatment for ARDS. However, preliminary
      clinical studies have shown conflicting results, and there is an urgent need for a mechanism
      to efficiently and effectively test new drugs in ARDS.

      Treatment studies in patients with ARDS are difficult to perform for three reasons. The
      complicated clinical picture makes it difficult to accumulate a large number of comparable
      patients in any one center. There is no agreement on the optimal supportive care of these
      critically ill patients. Many of the patients meeting study criteria will not be enrolled in
      study protocols because of the acute nature of the disease process. For these reasons,
      therapeutic trials in ARDS require multicenter cooperation.

      The concept for the initiative was first discussed at a meeting of the Adult Respiratory
      Distress Syndrome Foundation and staff of the Division of Lung Diseases. The results of a
      working meeting on uniform definitions in ARDS held at the 1992 meeting of the American
      Thoracic Society reinforced the recommendation from the community for National Heart, Lung,
      and Blood Institute participation in drug evaluation in ARDS. The concept for the initiative
      was approved by the September 1992 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council. The
      Requests for Proposals were released in October 1993.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      It is anticipated that over the 12-year period, several multicenter clinical trials will be
      developed and implemented. A 12-month Phase I period was devoted to planning and developing
      the infrastructure and committee structure and to protocol development and prioritization.
      In Phase IIa, staff are trained in data acquisition procedures and patients are enrolled.
      Additional protocol development may begin for subsequent studies. In Phase IIb, after the
      last patients in the first study have completed their follow-up measurements, data will be
      reviewed and the initial study will be closed out. Protocol development continues for
      subsequent trials. In Phase III, final data analysis and publication preparation will occur.

      Enrollment of 1,000 patients into the first ARDSNet protocol, "Ketoconazole and Respiratory
      Management in Acute Lung Injury/Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome" (KARMA) began in the
      spring of 1996. KARMA assessed the efficacy of 6 ml/kg versus 12 ml/kg positive pressure
      ventilation in reducing mortality and morbidity in patients with acute lung injury and ARDS.
      It also assessed the efficacy of ketoconazole, a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor, in
      reducing mortality and morbidity in patients with acute lung injury and ARDS. The
      ketoconazole arm was stopped by the Data Monitoring Safety Board (DSMB) in January 1997
      after the enrollment of 234 patients. Ketoconazole did not show any benefit in survival,
      duration of ventilation, or any measure of lung function. The ventilator arm of the protocol
      continued until March 10, 1999, and compared the efficacy of high (12 ml/kg) and low (6
      ml/kg) tidal volume ventilation in reducing mortality and morbidity in patients with acute
      lung injury and ARDS. The ventilator portion of the trial was stopped on March 10, 1999, on
      the recommendation of the DSMB when the data from the first 861 patients showed
      approximately 25 percent fewer deaths among patients receiving small, rather than large,
      breaths of air from the mechanical ventilator.

      A new drug, lisofylline, was selected to replace ketoconazole in the factorial design
      ventilation protocol. The lisofylline study (LARMA) began in February 1998. The study tested
      the efficacy of lisofylline, an analog of pentoxifylline, that has been shown to protect
      against tissue injury mediated by oxidants and to suppress production of a number of
      cytokine mediators that amplify the inflammatory process. Patients were randomized to either
      the high or low tidal volume ventilation treatment group and between lisofylline and
      placebo. The aim of the lisofylline protocol was to determine whether the administration of
      lisofylline early after the onset of acute lung injury or ARDS would reduce morbidity or
      mortality. The study was cosponsored by Cell Therapeutics Incorporated. The trial was
      stopped by the DSMB on May 27, 1999, after results were obtained on 221 patients. There was
      no effect on mortality, time on ventilation, or organ failure.

      The "Late Steroid Rescue Study (LaSRS): The Efficacy of Corticosteroids as Rescue Therapy
      for the Late Phase of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome" (LaSRS is pronounced "Lazarus")
      compared the effect of corticosteroids with placebo in the management of late-phase (greater
      than 7 days) ARDS. The study determined if the administration of the corticosteroid,
      methylprednisolone sodium succinate, in severe ARDS that was either stable or worsening
      after 7 days, would reduce mortality and morbidity. The primary end point was mortality at
      60 days. Secondary endpoints included ventilator-free days and organ failure-free days.
      LaSRS was designed to include 400 patients and began recruiting in the spring of 1997. In
      October 1999, the DSMB reduced the recruitment target number to 200 patients because the
      eligible patients were fewer than anticipated.

      In November 1999, the Network began a new trial as a follow-on to the ventilator trial that
      has been named the "Assessment of Low Tidal Volume and Elevated End-Expiratory Pressure to
      Obviate Lung Injury" (ALVEOLI). This trial was a prospective, randomized, controlled
      multicenter trial that included 549 patients and compared two groups of patients. Patients
      were randomized to receive mechanical ventilation with either lower or higher PEEP, which
      were set according to different tables of predetermined combinations of PEEP and fraction of
      inspired oxygen. The primary end point was mortality at 60 days. Secondary endpoints
      included ventilator-free days and organ failure-free days. The trial has ended and results
      were published in the July 22, 2004, issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. The
      results suggest that in patients with acute lung injury and ARDS who receive mechanical
      ventilation with a tidal-volume goal of 6 ml per kilogram of predicted body weight and an
      end-inspiratory plateau-pressure limit of 30 centimeters of water, clinical outcomes are
      similar whether lower or higher PEEP levels are used.

      Network investigators have developed a plan for a new protocol to assess the pulmonary
      artery catheter (PAC) as a management tool in ARDS. The new study was prompted by
      recommendations from the FDA/NIH Pulmonary Artery Catheter Clinical Outcomes workshop
      convened in August 1997 in response to concerns in the medical community regarding the
      clinical benefit and safety of PACs. The new protocol in the Fluids and Catheters Treatment
      Trial (FACTT) is a two-by-two factorial design comparing the patients receiving PAC or a
      central venous catheter (CVC) with one of two fluid management strategies (conservative
      versus liberal). The randomized, multicenter trial is designed to include 1,000 patients.
      The primary end point is mortality at 60 days. Secondary endpoints include ventilator-free
      days and organ failure-free days. See NCT00281268 for more information on this study.

      Albuterol versus Placebo in Acute Lung Injury (ALTA) Study: The Phase II/III study will test
      the safety and efficacy of aerosolized beta-2 adrenergic agonist therapy (albuterol sulfate)
      for reducing mortality in patients with acute lung injury. In Phase II, the safety of
      albuterol at the 5-mg dose will be compared to saline in approximately 100 patients. The
      dose will be reduced to 2.5 mg if patients exceed defined heart rate limits. Consequently, a
      Phase III placebo-controlled double-blinded, randomized trial on approximately 1,000
      patients will compare 60-day mortality and ventilator-free days to Day 28 between the safe
      albuterol dose established in Phase II and placebo saline.

      New efforts have been initiated to increase sample collection and utilize collected patient
      materials to investigate mechanisms of ARDS pathogenesis. In addition to investigations of
      hypotheses related to cytokines and inflammatory mediators, the Network is preparing to
      collect samples for future studies of genetic determinants of ARDS. The ARDSNet has been
      extended through September 2012, to continue clinical trials.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Men and women

          -  13 years of age or older

          -  ARDS or risk factors for ARDS (patients will be considered at risk if they are
             critically ill and have trauma, sepsis, shock, pneumonia, inhalation injury, drug
             overdose, pancreatitis, or hypertransfusion)
