TITLE:
      Women's Health Trial: Feasibility Study in Minority Populations
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the feasibility of recruiting women of different socioeconomic status and
      minority groups and to determine whether these women could achieve and maintain a modified
      fat-eating pattern. The full-scale trial sought to determine whether a low-fat diet could
      decrease the incidence of cancer and coronary heart disease in postmenopausal women. The
      National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute contributed funds over a three-year period to
      measure lipids, lipoproteins, and other cardiovascular disease risk factors.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The Request for Proposal for the Women's Health Trial: Feasibility Study in Minority
      Populations was developed and released by the National Cancer Institute with assistance from
      the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized. Recruitment began in August 1992 and ended in February 1994. Forty percent of
      the subjects were randomized to a control group and 60 percent to the dietary intervention
      group. Dietary counseling aimed to reduce total fat to 20 percent of calories, reduce
      saturated fat and dietary cholesterol intakes, and to increase the intake of fruits,
      vegetables, and grain products. Recruitment and randomization were conducted over an
      18-month period at three clinical centers. Other objectives of the trial included:
      development and evaluation of strategies for recruiting and retaining women of different
      racial and SES groups into a dietary intervention study; identification of factors affecting
      compliance; assessment of the effects of a modified fat eating pattern on cardiovascular
      disease risk factors, including fasting blood lipids and lipoproteins, glucose and insulin,
      body weight and blood pressure; identification and assessment of potential biochemical
      and/or biological markers for dietary adherence.

      Close-out visits began in May 1994 and ended in September 1994. These visits included six,
      twelve, and eighteen-month follow-up. NCI extended the coordinating center contract through
      January 1996 to support data analysis and publication of research results.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Postmenopausal women, aged 50 to 69 years, who consumed 38 percent or more of total
        calories as fat at baseline.
