TITLE:
      A Randomized Phase II Study of Two Doses of Interferon Alfa-2a (IFN Alfa-2a) in Combination With Zidovudine (AZT) and Dideoxycytidine (ddC) Versus AZT and ddC Only in Patients With HIV Infection and Less Than 400 CD4 Cells/mm3
SUMMARY:
      To determine the safety and efficacy of two doses of interferon alfa-2a ( IFN alfa-2a ) in
      combination with zidovudine ( AZT )/zalcitabine ( ddC ) versus AZT/ddC only in patients with
      HIV infection and CD4 count < 400 cells/mm3.

      AZT and ddC inhibit HIV by acting as reverse transcriptase chain terminators, while IFN
      alfa-2a inhibits translation of viral proteins. Combining agents that act at different sites
      of viral replication may improve HIV inhibition and produce more effective and sustained
      anti-HIV effects.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      AZT and ddC inhibit HIV by acting as reverse transcriptase chain terminators, while IFN
      alfa-2a inhibits translation of viral proteins. Combining agents that act at different sites
      of viral replication may improve HIV inhibition and produce more effective and sustained
      anti-HIV effects.

      Patients are randomly assigned to one of three treatment arms to receive AZT/ddC alone or
      combined with one of two doses of IFN alfa-2a. Treatment continues for up to 12 months after
      enrollment of the last patient. Patients are followed at 2, 4, and 8 weeks and every 8 weeks
      thereafter. Mean duration of follow-up is expected to be 13 months.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Isoniazid for < grade 2 peripheral neuropathy (if patient is also taking 50 mg/day
             pyridoxine).

          -  Phenytoin for < grade 2 peripheral neuropathy.

          -  A 21-day course of adjuvant systemic corticosteroid therapy for moderate to severe
             Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP).

          -  Chemoprophylaxis for PCP, candidiasis, herpes simplex infection (up to 1 g acyclovir
             daily), and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV infection.

          -  CD4 count < 400 cells/mm3 within 30 days prior to study entry.

        NOTE:

          -  Minimal Kaposi's sarcoma is allowed.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms and conditions are excluded:

          -  Active opportunistic infection requiring acute therapy.

          -  Need for maintenance therapy for cytomegalovirus infection, toxoplasmic encephalitis,
             or mycobacterial infection.

          -  Malignancy (other than minimal Kaposi's sarcoma) requiring therapy.

          -  Grade 2 or worse peripheral neuropathy.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Other antiretroviral drugs, biologic response modifiers, cytotoxic chemotherapy, or
             investigational drugs (unless approved by the protocol chairs).

          -  Recombinant erythropoietin, G-CSF, or GM-CSF.

          -  Drugs that cause peripheral neuropathy, e.g., gold, hydralazine, nitrofurantoin,
             vincristine, cisplatin, disulfiram, and diethyldithiocarbamate (unless approved by
             the protocol chairs).

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Radiation therapy (unless approved by the protocol chairs).

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of intolerance to AZT at 600 mg/day or less.

          -  Unexplained temperature of 38.5 degrees C persisting for 14 days or longer.

          -  Unexplained, chronic diarrhea defined as 3 or more stools per day persisting for 14
             days or longer.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Acute therapy for opportunistic infection within 14 days prior to study entry.

          -  Prior ddC, ddI, or IFN alfa-2a.

        Active substance abuse.
