TITLE:
      Beta-Blocker Heart Attack Trial (BHAT)
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether the regular administration of the beta-blocker drug propranolol to
      people who had had at least one documented myocardial infarction would result in a
      significant reduction of mortality from all causes over the follow-up period. Eligible
      volunteer patients were recruited to participate in a double-blind clinical trial within 21
      days after the onset of the acute event. One-half of the patients were randomly assigned to
      a beta-blocking drug (propranolol) and one-half to a placebo. The trial also evaluated the
      effect of propranolol on incidences of coronary heart disease mortality, sudden cardiac
      death, and nonfatal myocardial infarction plus coronary heart disease mortality in persons
      with documented previous myocardial infarction.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Survivors of a documented myocardial infarction are recognized as having a high risk of
      dying relative to the general population. Serious arrhythmias, occurring with or without
      evidence of new infarction, are a common cause of death in this population. Theoretically,
      an agent which (1) can block the sympathetic nervous activity thought to be involved in
      precipitating sudden death and (2) has non-neurogenic antiarrhythmic properties would be of
      value to people with coronary heart disease. Propranolol, like other beta- blocking agents,
      has these as well as other properties and therefore might be expected to prevent or retard
      complications of coronary heart disease such as serious arrhythmias. This would be reflected
      in a decrease in mortality due to coronary heart disease.

      A workshop on chronic antiarrhythmic therapy reviewed contemporary experimental data and
      clinical practice and recommended that a clinical trial be undertaken to clearly show the
      effects of beta-blocking drugs on mortality. Subsequently, such a trial was approved by the
      Clinical Applications and Prevention Advisory Committee, by the Cardiology Advisory
      Committee, and by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council.

      The study protocol was reviewed in February 1978 and recommended for approval by the
      policy-data monitoring board and ad hoc members. The protocol was approved by the Director
      of NHLBI in March 1978. Recruitment started on June 19, 1978, and ended in October 1980. A
      total of 3,837 patients were randomized. Units which participated in the trial included 32
      clinical centers, an EKG center, a central laboratory, a coordinating center, a 1-hour
      ambulatory ECG center, a 24-hour ambulatory EKG center, and an EKG tape quality control
      center.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      A randomized, double-blind design with single experimental and control groups. Patients were
      recruited while in the hospital for an acute myocardial infarction and were enrolled in the
      study before discharge. Eligible patients fulfilled the study definition of an acute
      myocardial infarction. The diagnosis was based either on electrocardiographic records
      showing evolving QRS segment changes or on ST segment and T wave changes together with
      enzyme changes and appropriate clinical history. One-half of the patients were placed on
      therapy using a beta-blocking drug (propranolol). The other half received a placebo. The
      prescribed maintenance dosage of propranolol was either l80 or 240 mgs/day, depending upon
      serum drug levels. Intervention duration averaged 25 months.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 30 to 69. Documented myocardial infarction.
