TITLE:
      Montreal Heart Attack Readjustment Trial (M-HART)
SUMMARY:
      To examine the impact of a monitoring and social support intervention upon survival of
      myocardial infarction patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Despite evidence that social support and various aspects of negative affect may influence
      prognosis after a myocardial infarction, the impact of psychosocial supportive interventions
      had not been demonstrated. Further, little was known about the impact of psychosocial and/or
      interventions among women patients. Previous work by Nancy Frasure-Smith and colleagues
      suggested that a one-year post-myocardial infarction program of monthly telephone monitoring
      of psychological stress symptoms, coupled with home nursing visits for patients reporting
      high stress levels, had an impact on one-year cardiac mortality and long-term myocardial
      infarction recurrences among men. However, methodological difficulties prevented drawing
      firm conclusions. A trial which corrected for these difficulties was conducted involving 948
      post-myocardial infarction patients. However, the project was too small to study enough
      patients to assess program impact separately for men and women. The trial was supported by
      Canadian sources. The NHLBI supplemented the study in order to expand the sample size from
      948 patients to 1,376 patients to allow gender analysis.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, with a multi-hospital design. At the time of discharge from the hospital
      following a documented myocardial infarction, patients were randomized to treatment and
      control groups. The control group received usual care from their physicians. In addition to
      usual care, treatment patients were phoned monthly and responded to a standardized index of
      psychological symptoms of stress. Those with high stress levels received home nursing visits
      to reduce their stress. Patients in both groups took part in three interviews: in the
      hospital, at three months, and at one year post-discharge. Interviews assessed depression,
      anxiety, anger, self-perceived stress, social support, medication compliance, and cardiac
      risk factors. Salivary cortisol, a physiological indicator of stress, was assessed on the
      evening following each interview. Indicators of residual myocardial infarction, ischemia,
      and arrhythmias were obtained from hospital charts. Outcome data were obtained from hospital
      charts, death certificates, and Quebec Medicare data and were blindly classified by study
      cardiologists.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women myocardial infarction patients.
