TITLE:
      A Prospective Study of Multidrug Resistance and a Pilot Study of the Safety of and Clinical and Microbiologic Response to Levofloxacin in Combination With Other Antimycobacterial Drugs for Treatment of Multidrug-Resistant Pulmonary Tuberculosis (MDRTB) in HIV-Infected Patients.
SUMMARY:
      To determine the demographic, behavioral, clinical, and geographic risk factors associated
      with the occurrence of multidrug-resistant pulmonary tuberculosis (MDRTB). To evaluate the
      clinical and microbiological responses and overall survival of MDRTB patients who are
      treated with levofloxacin-containing multiple-drug regimens chosen from a hierarchical list.
      Per 9/28/94 amendment, to assess whether persistent or recurrent positive sputum cultures of
      patients who show failure or relapse are due to the same strain or reinfection with a new
      strain.

      Among TB patients, there has been an increase in progressive disease due to the emergence of
      antimycobacterial drug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Failure to identify
      patients at high risk for MDRTB increases the hazard for both treatment failure and
      development of resistance to additional therapeutic agents. Efforts to improve survival in
      patients with MDRTB will depend on improved methods of assessing the risk of acquisition of
      MDRTB and identifying drug susceptibility patterns in a timely fashion.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Among TB patients, there has been an increase in progressive disease due to the emergence of
      antimycobacterial drug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Failure to identify
      patients at high risk for MDRTB increases the hazard for both treatment failure and
      development of resistance to additional therapeutic agents. Efforts to improve survival in
      patients with MDRTB will depend on improved methods of assessing the risk of acquisition of
      MDRTB and identifying drug susceptibility patterns in a timely fashion.

      Patients are asked a series of questions to determine epidemiologic factors that may be
      predictive of MDRTB. Patients who are determined to be at low risk for MDRTB will be
      referred to another TB treatment protocol (ACTG 222), if appropriate. Patients suspected of
      having primary or acquired MDRTB or those with confirmed MDRTB will be offered a regimen of
      anti-TB therapy from a hierarchically ordered list of drugs, based on the patient's
      resistance status (suspect primary MDRTB, suspect acquired MDRTB, or confirmed MDRTB). The
      hierarchical list is as follows: isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, streptomycin,
      levofloxacin, ethionamide, cycloserine, capreomycin, aminosalicylic acid, and clofazimine.
      Treatment will be administered daily for at least 6 months, then on an intermittent schedule
      at the clinician's discretion. Patients with confirmed MDRTB (defined as known resistance to
      at least isoniazid and rifampin within 6 months prior to study entry) will receive a minimum
      of 18 months of treatment following sputum culture conversion. Follow-up is performed every
      4 weeks for 8 weeks, and then every 8 weeks.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Patients must have:

          -  Working diagnosis of HIV infection.

          -  Working diagnosis of pulmonary TB.

        Per 08/02/94 amendment, patients with confirmed MDRTB or known susceptibilities for the
        current episode at baseline are not eligible for the epidemiologic study only.

        FOR TREATMENT PILOT:

          -  Positive sputum AFB smear (or a positive sputum culture for TB within 6 months prior
             to study entry).

          -  Assessment of suspect primary, suspect acquired, AND/OR confirmed MDRTB.

          -  Life expectancy of at least 2 weeks.

          -  Age >= 18 years for suspect MDRTB. Age >= 13 years for confirmed MDRTB.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Known hypersensitivity or resistance to quinolones.

          -  Other disorders or conditions for which the study drugs are contraindicated.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  More than 6 weeks total therapy within 3 months prior to study entry using three or
             more drugs effective against the isolates. (Per 08/02/94 amendment, patients from
             protocol ACTG 222/CPCRA 019 who have MDRTB are eligible for rollover to this study
             regardless of treatment duration on ACTG 222/CPCRA 019.)
