TITLE:
      Maintenance Therapies in Bipolar Disorders
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to see if adding a regimen of individualized psychotherapy can
      help bipolar I patients who are on lithium.

      While having a manic or depressed episode patients will be assigned randomly (like tossing a
      coin) to receive appropriate medication either with or without additional individual
      psychotherapy. If a patient responds well, he/she will again be assigned randomly to receive
      further preventative treatment in which medication will be managed either with continued
      medication clinic visits alone or with additional individual psychotherapy (the patient may
      not receive the same additional treatment this time). Patient response to treatment will be
      evaluated throughout the study. If manic/depressive symptoms return at any point during the
      study, the patient will be treated with appropriate medication and will continue the study.

      An individual may be eligible for this study if he/she:

      Has Bipolar I disorder, is experiencing a manic or depressed episode at the time of study
      entry, and is at least 18 years old.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The primary goal of this investigation is to examine the additive prophylactic potential of
      an individual psychotherapy based on interpersonal and social rhythm principles in bipolar I
      patients maintained on lithium carbonate (lithium). An adaptation of maintenance
      interpersonal psychotherapy, this intervention takes into account the specific
      vulnerabilities, symptoms, and interpersonal problem areas associated with bipolar disorder.

      Acutely ill patients in a manic or depressed episode are randomly assigned to either
      individual psychotherapy or medication clinic visits in addition to appropriate
      pharmacotherapy (lithium carbonate). Patients who stabilize (HRSD and Bech-Rafaelsen < 7 for
      four weeks) are then randomly assigned to preventative treatment with either individual
      psychotherapy or medication clinic visits in addition to pharmacotherapy. Thus, patients in
      this study receive one of four possible treatment strategies: 1) preliminary phase
      psychotherapy followed by preventative phase psychotherapy; 2) preliminary phase medication
      clinic visits followed by preventative phase psychotherapy; 3) preliminary phase
      psychotherapy followed by preventative phase medication clinic visits in addition to
      psychotherapy; or 4) preliminary phase medication clinic visits followed by preventative
      phase medication clinic visits in addition to psychotherapy. Those patients who experience a
      relapse (during the initial twelve weeks of the preventative phase) or a recurrence (after
      week 12 of the preventative phase) are treated with appropriate pharmacotherapy and
      continued in psychotherapy or medication clinic visits as dictated by their original
      randomization assignment. These patients are then followed for the remainder of what would
      have been their time in the protocol had they remained well.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients must have:

        Acute bipolar I illness and be experiencing a manic or depressed episode at the time of
        study entry.

        Required:

        Current treatment with lithium carbonate.
