TITLE:
      Diet and Exercise for Elevated Risk (DEER)
SUMMARY:
      To determine the effect in men and postmenopausal women with elevated LDL-cholesterol and
      low HDL-cholesterol of an exercise regimen with or without the National Cholesterol
      Education Program (NCEP) Step Two diet compared to usual care control group on HDL- and
      LDL-cholesterol.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The NCEP is a major public education program providing advice to physicians and the public
      on management and prevention of coronary heart disease. However, data supporting the advice
      are derived primarily from middle-aged men, with less data available for women and older
      individuals. Furthermore, there have been recent reports that when low saturated fat diets
      such as the NCEP Step One and NCEP Step Two diets, are followed, HDL-cholesterol is lowered
      as well as LDL-cholesterol.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, controlled, factorial design powered for men and women separately. One hundred
      eighty postmenopausal women, 45 through 64 years of age, and 197 men, 30 through 64 years of
      age, who had low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels (< or =59 mg per
      deciliter in women and < or =44 mg per deciliter in men) and moderately elevated levels of
      low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (>125 mg per deciliter but <210 mg per deciliter
      in women and >125 mg per deciliter but <190 mg per deciliter in men) were enrolled. The
      subjects were randomly assigned to aerobic exercise, the NCEP Step 2 diet, or diet plus
      exercise, or to a control group, which received no intervention. The four interventions were
      delivered for one year: usual care (written dietary materials only with delayed intervention
      optional), exercise only (supervised, progressive aerobic exercise program at least three
      times per week), diet only (group and individual dietary instruction on the NCEP Step
      One/Step Two diet delivered by registered dietitians), and diet plus exercise. At baseline
      and at the end of one year, measurements were made of blood lipids and lipoproteins, plasma
      glucose and insulin, glucose tolerance, blood pressure, body composition through hydrostatic
      weighing and waist and hip circumterences, aerobic fitness (VO2 max), and five unannounced
      24-hr. recalls. The primary outcomes measured was HDL-cholesterol, major secondary endpoints
      included LDL-C, LDL-C/HDL-C ratio, and triglycerides.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men with with LDL-cholesterol of 125-189 mg/dL and HDL-cholesterol below or equal to 44
        mg/dL, and postmenopausal women, age 45 to 64, with LDL-cholesterol of 125 to 209 mg/dL
        and HDL-cholesterol below or equal to 59 mg/dL.
