TITLE:
      The DETEcT Study - Delirium in Elderly paTiEnts Admitted to Trauma
SUMMARY:
      Primary objectives are to define incidence and prevalence of Delirium in an elderly
      population admitted to the Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology and, in the
      postoperative phase, in the high Dependency Unit as well as to determine the presence of
      risk factors. Secondary objectives are to determine mean hospital stay, rates of
      complications as well as in-hospital mortality and at 1-3 and 12 months after discharge,
      functional recovery and cognitive outcomes at 1, 3 and 12 moths follow-up.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The aging of population as well as the increased life expectancy put progressively urgent
      demands about the adequacy of the level of care provided in a hospital environment to ensure
      clinical pathways tailored on the needs of each individual patient. On the other hand, the
      gradual evolution of Health Care systems to care for the acute, with increasing levels of
      specialization often technologically driven, cannot and must not neglect these aspects of
      personalization of care protecting the elderly "frail" patient, because of its intrinsic
      characteristics. In such a context, evaluation of frailty undertakes not only the meaning of
      prevention and promotion of quality of life but it takes in account important issues for
      patient's safety and the economic weight it entails. Delirium (acute confusional state) is a
      complex syndrome which frequently occurs in the elderly hospitalized population. Development
      of Delirium is associated with negative outcomes such as a longer hospital stay, a higher
      rate of complications, cognitive and functional decline, loss of independence,
      institutionalization, and, ultimately, death. For skilled healthcare professionals, on the
      other hand, it represents a challenging condition because a prompt and accurate diagnosis
      with the introduction of all those prevention and non-pharmacological measures may reduce
      the incidence, severity and/or duration of Delirium and improve functional recovery.
      Therefore the meaning of conducting such an observational study is also to provide evidence
      of patients' needs and address the on-ground educational aspect for healthcare professionals
      in a daily practice. The purposes of the study are to determine the incidence and prevalence
      (before and after surgery) of Delirium in an elderly population admitted to the Department
      of Orthopedics and Traumatology and in the High Dependency Unit in the postoperative phase
      as well as to determine the risk factors for developing such a condition. Secondary
      objectives are mean hospital stay, rates of complications as well as in-hospital mortality
      and at 1, 3 and 12 months after discharge, functional recovery and cognitive outcomes at 1,
      3 and 12 months follow-up.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with any medical condition with an age of 65 years and older

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Impossibility to give an informed consent; refusal
