TITLE:
      Boston Area Anticoagulation Trial for Atrial Fibrillation (BAATAF)
SUMMARY:
      To determine the benefits and risks of oral anticoagulant therapy in reducing embolic stroke
      and systemic emboli in patients with atrial fibrillation without rheumatic heart disease.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The efficacy of oral anticoagulation therapy in reducing the risk of embolic stroke in
      patients with atrial fibrillation and rheumatic heart disease was well known. The value of
      anticoagulant therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation without rheumatic heart disease
      had not been established. Several studies strongly suggested that although the risk of
      stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation was greatest in the presence of valvular
      disease, the risk of stroke in the absence of valvular disease was also much greater in
      patients with atrial fibrillation than those without this arrhythmia. What was lacking was a
      detailed controlled study assessing the degree of reduction in stroke risk by
      anticoagulation of fibrillating patients without valvular disease.

      The second question asked was whether the added potential morbidity or mortality associated
      with long-term anticoagulation therapy justified its use in the prophylactic treatment of
      neurologically asymptomatic patients with atrial fibrillation, even if it did reduce stroke
      risk. Gastrointestinal, urinary tract, cutaneous and joint hemorrhages were all potential
      serious complications, as was cerebral hemorrhage, including bleeding into areas of recent
      cerebral infarction. Interest had again focused on hemorrhagic complications of stroke in
      anticoagulated patients and among risk factors for hemorrhage were large, recent infarcts.
      No one suggested that anticoagulation, even if very successful in reducing stroke risk,
      would eliminate it altogether, and thus hemorrhagic infarction was an important potential
      problem, as was assessment of risk of primary intracerebral hemorrhage.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized non-blind. Recruitment began in September 1985 and ended in June 1989. The
      experimental group of 212 patients received long-term, low-dose warfarin. The control group
      of 208 patients did not receive warfarin but could choose to take aspirin. Average follow-up
      was 2.2 years. The primary endpoint was non-hemorrhage stroke. At entry and annually, the
      history was recorded and patients underwent a physical examination focusing on neurologic
      factors. Every year, beginning at six months, patients were sent a questionnaire on
      neurologic symptoms, bleeding episodes, and other medical conditions. Study nurses contacted
      all patients to review their responses. Each patient's referring physician was contacted at
      three months and nine months during each year of follow-up.

      Participating institutions in the multicenter trial were organized into three groups. At
      Group I institutions, on-site investigators performed all clinical evaluations. In Group II,
      personnel from the central site hospital, the Massachusetts General Hospital, traveled to
      the local hospitals to evaluate, randomize, and follow patients. Group III institutions
      referred patients directly to the Massachusetts General Hospital for all procedures.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, 18 years of age or older, with non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation.
