TITLE:
      Validation of a Delirium Monitor
SUMMARY:
      Delirium is a common disorder in hospitalized patients, nevertheless it is poorly recognized
      by physicians and nurses, even when screening instruments are used. Electroencephalography
      (EEG) appears to be a sensitive tool for the diagnosis of delirium. However, standard EEG
      recording with 25 electrodes is labor intensive. We have previously showed that a brief EEG
      registration with three electrodes and automatic processing can distinguish patients with
      delirium from patients without delirium very well. However, these findings need to be
      validated in an unselected population.

      The primary objective of this validation study is to investigate the sensitivity,
      specificity, and predictive values of the EEG-based delirium monitor (including three
      electrodes and a reference electrode) compared to delirium quantification in frail elderly
      patients after surgery.

      In an international multicenter study, 154 frail elderly patients will be included who will
      undergo elective surgery and are expected to remain admitted for at least two postoperative
      days. Patients are excluded if communication is not possible or admitted for neurological
      surgery.

      A five minute EEG registration with the delirium monitor with four electrodes will be
      performed prior surgery and three consecutive days after surgery or until discharge. Within
      one hour of the EEG recording, the delirium assessment will be performed and recorded on
      video, which will be evaluated by delirium experts. The relative delta power (calculated
      from one minute of artifact-free EEG segment) will be compared with the conclusion of the
      delirium experts.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  60 years and older

          -  Frail

          -  Undergoing elective surgery

          -  Expected to remain admitted for at least 2 postoperative days

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  No communication possible due to a language barrier or deafness

          -  Admission for neurological surgery

          -  Participation in this study during a previous hospital admission

          -  Practical or logistical reasons hampering the use of the delirium monitor, such as
             technical failure of the monitor

          -  Isolation because of known carrier ship of a resistant bacterium
