TITLE:
      Sodium Sensitivity in African Americans
SUMMARY:
      To compare the effects of two levels of dietary sodium on blood pressure in Black men and
      women, and to determine what factors predict the degree of response.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The study permitted a more precise estimate of the effects of sodium chloride on blood
      pressure in Blacks and a systematic examination of sodium sensitivity defined by various
      methods. The results had significance in answering questions about risk factors for blood
      pressure in Blacks and for defining sodium sensitivity.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Double-blind, two-period cross-over. All participants were given six weeks of intensive
      nutritional counseling to lower 24-hour urine sodium output from an estimated 165 mEq/24
      hours at baseline to less than 140 mEq/24 hours. Only those participants who excreted less
      than 140 mEq /24 hours after six weeks of intensive dietary sodium intervention and had
      greater than 70 percent adherence to study capsules were eligible for randomization.
      Eligible subjects were assigned to one of two treatment sequences: 100 mEq of sodium
      chloride capsules per day during period one followed by placebo capsules during period two;
      placebo capsules during period one followed by 100 mEq of sodium chloride capsules per day
      during period two. The major endpoint was change in diastolic and systolic blood pressure. A
      number of other measures were carried out, including blood chemistries, glucose tolerance
      (glucose and insulin), insulin resistance, urinary kallikrein, serum renin, and plasma
      norepinephrine. Other major aims of the trial included testing general new diagnostic
      criteria for sodium sensitivity, examining predictors of sodium sensitivity, and examining
      how changes in sodium intake influenced change in specific metabolic parameters. The trial
      design incorporated careful control of the dietary changes and strict standardization of
      blood pressure measurement with a random-zero device. The study was extended through June
      1997 on FY 1995 funds.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      No eligibility criteria
