TITLE:
      Calcium Supplements for Bone Health in Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis
SUMMARY:
      This study looks at the effects of taking calcium pills on bone health in young people with
      juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). In this 2-year study, children aged 6-18 who have JRA
      will take either a calcium supplement or a matching placebo (inactive or "dummy" pill)
      containing no calcium. During the study, researchers and patients will not know if a patient
      is taking calcium or placebo. We believe that patients who take calcium supplements will
      have at least a 10 percent greater increase in total body bone mineral density compared to
      patients who take the placebo.

      We will evaluate patients at Children's Hospital Medical Center every 6 months for 2 years.
      During this 2-year period, participants in the study will take one multivitamin containing
      400 IU (international units) of vitamin D and either 1,000 mg of calcium carbonate (Tums
      tablets) by mouth or a matching placebo once a day. We will check patients 6 and 18 months
      after the 2-year treatment period to find out if people in the Tums-treated group maintain
      any increases in bone formation that occurred during the 2-year treatment period.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 24 months in which juvenile
      rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) patients will take either an oral calcium supplement of 1,000 mg
      elemental calcium per day or a matching placebo containing no calcium (Ca), plus one
      multivitamin per day. We hypothesize that patients receiving calcium supplementation will
      demonstrate at least a 10 percent greater increase in total body bone mineral density
      compared to those treated with placebo.

      We will evaluate patients at Children's Hospital Medical Center (CHMC) every 6 months for 2
      years. We will also evaluate patients 6 and 18 months after the end of the intervention
      period to determine the persistence of any demonstrated increased bone mineralization in the
      Tums-treated group. The study requires analysis of human blood and urine samples and
      low-dose radiation exposure.

      We have randomized 193 JRA patients equally into two treatment groups (active and placebo).
      The active treatment group is taking, in a single daily dose, two 500 mg tablets of
      elemental Ca as CaC03 (calcium carbonate) and one multivitamin tablet containing 400 IU
      vitamin D. The placebo treatment group is taking, in a single daily dose, two placebo
      tablets (matched on size, appearance, and taste) containing 0 mg elemental Ca and one
      multivitamin tablet containing 400 IU vitamin D. We do all patient evaluations in the
      Clinical Research Center at Children's Hospital Medical Center.

      Every 6 months during the 2-year intervention trial, we will perform interval history,
      general and joint physical exam, anthropometric measurements (height, weight, BMI), pill
      counts, MMEM monitor check, DXA scan of total body and lumbar spine for bone mineral
      density, and dispensing of study drugs. At yearly intervals during the intervention trial,
      we will do the Youth/Adolescent Questionnaire (YAQ) on diet (which is validated for 1-year
      recall), 3-day diet diary for current intake, blood tests for mineral and calcitropic
      hormone concentrations, 24-hour urine for measurements of bone turnover markers and mineral
      excretion, physical function assessment (JAFAR), and physical activity questionnaire. We
      will obtain blood for determining vitamin D receptor (VDR) genotype at baseline only. We
      will perform fasting random urine tests to determine Ca/creatinine ratio to assess for
      treatment-induced hypercalciuria at months 0, 3, 6, 12, 18, and 24.

      Monthly during the intervention trial, the study coordinator will contact all participants
      by phone in a blinded fashion to increase compliance and encourage continued participation
      in the trial. We will evaluate participants 6 and 18 moths after the end of the intervention
      trial. At each of these visits, we will obtain the following: general and medication
      history, general and joint physical exam, Tanner Stage, anthropometric measurements, blood
      for minerals and calcitropic hormones, 24-hour urine collection for measurements of bone
      turnover markers and mineral excretion, JAFAR, physical activity questionnaire, and total
      body and lumbar spine DXA scans. The YAQ and 3-day diet diary will be completed at the
      42-month visit. Prior to every DXA scan, we will do a urine pregnancy test in all
      menstruating females to ensure that they are not pregnant. Any patient who withdraws from
      the blinded portion of the study early will complete an evaluation as outlined for the 24
      months visit. Patients who withdraw early during the open phase of the study will complete
      the 42 months evaluation.

      We will exclude from the study people who have recently taken systemic corticosteroids,
      people taking oral contraceptives, smokers, and pregnant women because these factors have
      been shown to significantly lower bone mineralization. We will withdraw subjects from the
      study if they demonstrate an elevated fasting random urinary calcium/creatinine ratio
      (>0.2), a chronic disease in addition to JRA that affects growth or bone mineralization, or
      they become pregnant. We will include these patients and all those withdrawing from the
      study voluntarily in an "intention-to-treat" analysis.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  JRA Diagnosis by American College of Rheumatology diagnostic criteria

          -  Age 6-18 years

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Taking calcium supplements or calcium- containing antacids

          -  Taken systemic corticosteroids in the prior 3 months

          -  Use of oral contraceptives

          -  Smoker

          -  Have been or currently pregnant

          -  Have another chronic illness that affects growth or bone mineralization (for example,
             Down's Syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, steroid-dependent asthma)

          -  Fasting random urinary calcium/creatinine ratio > 0.2
