TITLE:
      Enalapril After Anthracycline Cardiotoxicity
SUMMARY:
      To determine if the chronic administration of enalapril, an inhibitor of angiotensin
      converting enzyme (ACE), reduces progression of cardiac dysfunction in pediatric oncology
      patients who have received anthracyclines, and who are not currently on digoxin, diuretics,
      or vasodilators for heart failure.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Pediatric oncology patients who have been treated with anthracycline therapy as a part of
      their chemotherapeutic regimen often subsequently develop left ventricular failure. The
      optimal medical management is not known. This trial will be the first to provide
      comprehensive data on a well characterized population regarding the role of afterload
      reduction using enalapril to treat ventricular dysfunction after anthracycline chemotherapy

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind. Randomization was stratified by total anthracycline dose,
      follow-up time from treatment, and age at time of treatment. All patients received the
      following baseline tests: Maximal Cardiac Index (MCI) on cycle ergometry;
      echocardiogram/Doppler determined left ventricular end systolic wall stress (ESWS); gated
      nuclear angiography (GNA) to determine left ventricular ejection fraction; Holter monitoring
      for 24 hour ECG monitoring. Patients were randomized to either enalapril or placebo.
      Follow-up visits were conducted to ensure compliance and screen for side effects. MCI and
      ESWS were measured twice yearly, while all four tests were repeated at the conclusion of the
      trial, after four to five years of treatment. The primary outcome variables were the rate of
      decline in MCI and the rate of increase in ESWS. Secondary outcomes were the change in left
      ventricular ejection fraction and the incidence of arrhythmias. A second aim of the study
      was to develop an algorithm to determine indications for enalapril use if the study
      succeeded in showing a treatment effect. This required modeling the probability of cardiac
      dysfunction given patient characteristics at treatment, treatment type, cardiac status
      during treatment and at follow-up, and the development of cost effectiveness and medical
      decision making models testing the proposed algorithm.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Boy and girl pediatric oncology patients, at least two years off treatment, with some
        cardiac dysfunction, but not congestive heart failure, after receiving anthracyclines.
        Patients were not on digoxin, diuretics, or vasodilators for heart failure.
