TITLE:
      Preconditioning Shields Against Vascular Events in Surgery
SUMMARY:
      Major vascular surgery involves operations to repair swollen blood vessels, clear debris
      from blocked arteries or bypass blocked blood vessels. Patients with these problems are a
      high-risk surgical group as they have generalized blood vessel disease. These puts them at
      risk of major complications around the time of surgery such as heart attacks , strokes and
      death. The mortality following repair of a swollen main artery in the abdomen is about 1 in
      20. This contrasts poorly with the 1 per 100 risk of death following a heart bypass. Simple
      and cost-effective methods are needed to reduce the risks of major vascular surgery. Remote
      ischaemic preconditioning (RIPC) may be such a technique. To induce RIPC, the blood supply
      to muscle in the patient's arm is interrupted for about 5 minutes. It is then restored for a
      further five minutes. This cycle is repeated three more times. The blood supply is
      interrupted simply by inflating a blood pressure cuff to maximum pressure. This repeated
      brief interruption of the muscular blood supply sends signals to critical organs such as the
      brain and heart, which are rendered temporarily resistant to damage from reduced blood
      supply. Several small randomized clinical trials in patients undergoing different types of
      major vascular surgery have demonstrated a potential benefit. This large, multi-centre trial
      aims to determine whether RIPC can reduce complications in routine practice.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The demand for major vascular surgery is increasing [1]. Patients requiring procedures such
      as aortic aneurysm repair, carotid endarterectomy, lower limb surgical re-vascularisation
      and major lower limb amputation for end-stage vascular disease constitute a high-risk
      surgical cohort. Peri-operative complications such as myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular
      accident, renal failure and death are common [2,3]. Multiple potential mechanisms may result
      in these complications. For example, myocardial injury may result from systemic hypotension
      leading to reduced flow across a tight coronary artery stenosis or, alternatively, it may
      arise due to acute occlusion when an unstable plaque ruptures. Most strategies aimed at
      peri-operative risk reduction target a single potential mechanism. For example,
      beta-blockade may prevent myocardial injury due to overwork, but cannot prevent acute
      coronary occlusion. There is a requirement for a simple, effective intervention that
      protects tissues against injury via multiple different mechanisms. Remote ischemic
      preconditioning (RIPC) may be suitable.

      Ischemic preconditioning is a phenomenon whereby a brief period of non-lethal ischemia in a
      tissue renders it resistant to the effects of a subsequent much longer ischaemic insult. It
      was first described in the canine heart [4]. Subsequent clinical trials showed that ischemic
      preconditioning reduced heart muscle damage following coronary artery bypass grafting [5]
      and liver dysfunction following hepatic resection [6]. Following cardiac surgery, it is
      associated with a reduction in critical care stay, arrhythmias and inotrope use [7].
      However, ischemic preconditioning requires direct interference with the target tissues'
      blood supply, limiting its clinical utility. Further experimental work suggested that brief
      ischemia in one tissue, such as the kidneys, could confer protection on distant organs such
      as the heart [8]. A similar effect was observed after transient skeletal muscle ischemia
      [9-11]. This effect is referred to as 'preconditioning at a distance' or 'remote ischemic
      preconditioning' (RIPC).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age greater than 18 years

          -  Patient willing to give full informed consent for participation

          -  Patients undergoing elective carotid endarterectomy or

          -  Patients undergoing open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair or

          -  Patients undergoing endovascular abdominal aneurysm repair or

          -  Patients undergoing surgical lower limb revascularisation (suprainguinal or
             infrainguinal)

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Pregnancy

          -  Significant upper limb peripheral arterial disease

          -  Previous history of upper limb deep vein thrombosis

          -  Patients on glibenclamide or nicorandil (these medications may interfere with RIPC)
             Patients with an estimated pre-operative glomerular filtration rate <
             30mls/min/1.73m2

          -  Patients with a known history of myocarditis, pericarditis or amyloidosis

          -  Patients with an estimated pre-operative glomerular filtration rate <
             30mls/min/1.73m2.

          -  Patients with severe hepatic disease defined as an international normalised ratio >2
             in the absence of systemic anticoagulation

          -  Patients with severe respiratory disease (for the trial, defined as patients
             requiring home oxygen therapy)

          -  Patients previously enrolled in the trial representing for a further procedure

          -  Patients with previous axillary surgery
