TITLE:
      Sodium-Potassium Blood Pressure Trial in Children
SUMMARY:
      To examine the effects of nutritional intervention on the rate of rise of blood pressure in
      late childhood and early adolescence.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Since 1970, children and adolescents with hypertension have been detected with increasing
      frequency. Many of them were thought to have primary or essential hypertension and it
      remained unclear how they should be managed. Additionally, since tracking of blood pressure
      occurred even in early life, it was believed that youngsters with blood pressures
      persistently in the upper deciles for age were at increased risk for later hypertension. No
      clinical trials had been performed in this age group to examine the effects of
      non-pharmacologic or drug therapy in lowering blood pressure. The trial was one of the first
      attempts to examine the effects of a nutritional intervention on the rate of rise of blood
      pressure in late childhood and early adolescence.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, partial-blind. After 19,542 fifth to eighth grade students were screened, 210
      (105 boys and 105 girls) from the upper 15 percentiles of blood pressure distribution were
      randomly assigned to one of three groups: low sodium diet (70 mmol sodium intake per day),
      potassium chloride supplementation (normal diet plus 1 mmol/kg potassium chloride per day),
      and placebo (normal diet plus placebo capsule). Capsules for the potassium chloride and
      placebo groups were administered in a double blind protocol. Blood pressure was measured
      every three months for three years. The effect of the intervention was determined by
      comparing the rate of rise (slope) of blood pressure among the groups using a
      random-coefficient growth curve model.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Children in grades 5 through 8 whose systolic blood pressure was greater than or equal to
        120 mm Hg on two visits.
