TITLE:
      Non-cardiac Chest Pain Evaluation and Treatment Study (CARPA) - Part 1: Diagnosis.
SUMMARY:
      The overall aim of the project is to evaluate diagnosis and treatment of chest pain
      originating from the musculoskeletal system. Specifically, we wish to investigate prevalence
      and character of such chest pain in a population of patients with acute chest pain, admitted
      to a university hospital based acute chest pain clinic, and undergoing evaluation of acute
      coronary syndrome (Part 1). Then, to test a manually-based treatment protocol to patients
      with diagnosed musculoskeletal chest pain in a randomized clinical trial (Part 2).

      The specific purpose of this study (Part 1) is to determine the exact number of patients
      with acute chest pain origination from the musculoskeletal system, and to describe their
      cardiac status with respect to ischemic heart disease. Further, we wish to evaluate the
      decision making process of the chiropractor.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Acute chest pain is a common reason for hospital admission. The focus of diagnosis is of
      course pain of cardiac origin including myocardial infarction and/or other ischemic heart
      disease; however, in up to 50% of cases the aetiology may be non-cardiac. Differential
      diagnoses include primarily pulmonary, gastrointestinal, psychosocial, or musculoskeletal
      problems, and musculoskeletal problems may account for around 20% of the total number of
      admissions in acute chest pain clinics. Thus the musculoskeletal system is a recognized
      possible source of pain in patients with chest pain even though a confident diagnosis of
      musculoskeletal chest pain can be difficult to establish since no gold standard exists to
      verify this diagnosis.

      Chest pain patients with normal coronary anatomy have an excellent prognosis for survival
      and a future risk of cardiac morbidity similar to that reported in the background
      population. However, about three quarters of patients with non-cardiac chest pain continue
      to suffer from residual chest pain with large socio-economic consequences. Therefore, a
      search for an alternative cause with related possibilities for treatment is warranted. Given
      these perspectives, the general objective of the present work is to study the diagnosis of
      chest pain originating from the musculoskeletal system of the cervical and thoracic spine,
      and thorax in patients with chest pain of various origins, and to evaluate ischemic heart
      disease status among patients with presumed musculoskeletal pain.

      Evaluation:

      Patients with musculoskeletal chest pain will be identified using a standardized examination
      protocol comprised of a semi-structured interview, a general health examination, and a
      specific manual examination of the muscles and joints of the neck, thoracic spine and
      thorax. All patients will have a Myocardial Perfusion Imaging (MPI) performed and results
      from the MPI will be compared with the musculoskeletal status. Specific important parameters
      of the standardized examination protocol will be identified and the decision making process
      of the chiropractor will be evaluated.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Acute episode of chest pain of less than 7 days duration as primary reason for
             admission to a chest pain clinic.

          -  Admitted to a chest pain clinic, suspected of acute coronary infarction, but with a
             negative diagnosis confirmed by normal coronary enzymes and normal ECG.

          -  Pain arising from the thorax and/or neck.

          -  Able to read and understand Danish.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Acute coronary syndrome.

          -  Percutaneous Coronary Intervention.

          -  Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting.

          -  Other disease, diagnosed during this admission, which is likely to have caused the
             acute episode of chest pain.

          -  No written consent.

          -  Inflammatory joint disease.

          -  Diabetes mellitus, type I.

          -  Fibromyalgia.

          -  Sharp trauma to the chest.

          -  Malignant disease.

          -  Apoplexy.

          -  Gross osseous anomalies, such as pronounced scoliosis.

          -  Known or suspected osteoporosis.

          -  Pregnancy.

          -  Dementia/unable to cooperate.

          -  Not residing in the County of Funen.

          -  Does not want to participate.

          -  Other - reason for exclusion will be noted.
