TITLE:
      Relative Adrenal Insufficiency in Preterm Very Low Birth Weight Infants With Shock
SUMMARY:
      The objective of this study is to estimate the prevalence of relative adrenal insufficiency
      in preterm very low birth weight infants with and without shock.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Till date, no studies are available that have evaluated the incidence of relative adrenal
      insufficiency in preterm very low birth weight (VLBW) infants with shock. The focus had been
      on stable preterm and critically ill preterm infants. Given that steroid treatment improves
      blood pressure and stabilizes cardiovascular status in preterm infants with volume and
      pressor-resistant hypotension,it becomes essential to examine the incidence of adrenal
      insufficiency in this cohort (rather than a broad group of critically ill preterm infants).
      Moreover, there are no studies on adrenal function in Indian neonates.

      The purpose of this study is to compare the levels of basal and stimulated (using low dose
      [1µg/k] ACTH) cortisol levels in preterm (28-34 weeks gestation) very low birth weight
      (birth weight 750 gm to 1500 gm) infants with shock in the first week of life requiring
      vasopressor therapy and matched (gestation, birth weight, postnatal age-matched)
      hemodynamically stable infants ('control group').
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All preterm (28 to 34 week gestation) very low birth weight (birth weight
             750-1500grams.) infants born at AIIMS would be eligible for enrollment in the study.
             Of these infants, those who meet the following criteria would be enrolled.

          -  Cases: Preterm (28 to 34 week gestation) infants with birth weight between 750 and
             1500 grams with shock in the first week of life requiring vasopressor therapy
             (dopamine or dobutamine or both in a dose of > 10 mcg/kg/min)

          -  Controls: Stable preterm (28 to 34 week gestation) infants with birth weight between
             750 and 1500 grams who are matched for gestational age, birth weight, postnatal-age.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Major congenital malformations

          -  Mother receiving anticonvulsant / anti-tubercular drugs (rifampicin, isoniazid)

          -  Postnatal corticosteroid treatment

          -  Refusal to give consent
