TITLE:
      Child and Adolescent Trial for Cardiovascular Health (CATCH)
SUMMARY:
      To assess the effectiveness of school-based risk reduction interventions involving three
      components: environmental changes related to food consumption, physical activity, and
      smoking policy in the school; classroom curriculum; and family and home-based education.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Coronary atherosclerosis begins in childhood and is expressed in adulthood as angina
      pectoris, myocardial infarction, or sudden death. The earliest lesion in the vascular system
      is the fatty streak, characterized by an accumulation of lipids in the intima. These lesions
      are present in the vessels of infants and young children. Whether these fatty streaks are
      precursors of more complex lesions is controversial. However, fibrous plaques, intimal
      lesions consisting of a central core of extracellular lipids covered with a cap of
      fibromuscular tissue, are frequently seen in children by 15 years of age. In addition,
      necropsy studies of United States battle casualties confirm the presence of advanced
      coronary lesions in young adults. Thus, it appears that the atherosclerotic process is well
      established in the American population by young adulthood.

      Epidemiologic studies in adults have found that associated with the development of coronary
      artery disease are a number of risk factors including age, sex, hypercholesterolemia,
      hypertension, cigarette smoking, diabetes, a family history of coronary artery disease,
      obesity, lack of physical activity, and perhaps coronary prone behavior. Of the modifiable
      factors, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and cigarette smoking have the greatest
      predictive value.

      A small reduction of serum cholesterol levels in all children by a modest diet change, it
      has been hypothesized, would reduce coronary heart disease. More severe dietary restriction,
      in some cases in conjunction with medication, is recommended for very high-risk pediatric
      populations only. In addition, surveillance of blood pressure, avoidance of cigarette
      smoking and overweight, and regular physical exercise are prudent recommendations for all
      children.

      The National Children and Youth Fitness Study (NCYFS) offered new standards for measuring
      fitness, profiled youth exercise habits, and helped to explain the contribution of exercise
      to fitness. Nationwide, 8,000 fifth- through twelfth-graders in 140 schools in 19 states
      participated in the study between February and May 1984. Findings revealed that these youths
      had substantially more body fat than their counterparts in the 1960's and that approximately
      half of the students did not perform sufficient physical activity to maintain effective
      cardiorespiratory functioning. Results from the 1985 national survey of drug use among high
      school students indicate that most initial experiences with smoking occur before high
      school, with 13 percent of students beginning prior to tenth grade. Substantial increases in
      smoking occur between seventh and eighth grade and inner city Hispanic students show higher
      smoking rates than white or Black inner city youth.

      Although there is debate about the cut-off point at which children might be considered at
      risk for coronary heart disease, it is estimated that 36-60 percent of children in the
      United States exhibit at least one modifiable risk factor for coronary disease by the age of
      12. The nation's schools may provide an appropriate and efficient vehicle for reducing
      cardiovascular risks in large populations. About 47 million children and young people attend
      some 115,000 public and private schools. These students are in school from 5 to 8 hours each
      day, 5 days per week, for nearly 36 weeks per year. Furthermore, the school food services
      provide 20 percent or more of total daily caloric intake on school days for children who
      select the school lunch program.

      Currently, school-based health promotion programs are conceptualized as including curriculum
      and related organizational factors that support healthy behavior. The existence of
      comprehensive programs is limited throughout the nation. The results of numerous
      school-based nutrition studies report changes in students' knowledge about nutrition.
      Several studies based on social learning theory report changes in behavior and knowledge
      about nutrition. Although health education interventions may succeed in increasing
      children's knowledge and producing changes in behavioral intentions and behavior, the
      behavioral changes may not be maintained unless the school environment and children's
      parents reinforce the intentions.

      Substantial progress in the field of cigarette smoking prevention in youths has been made
      during the past few years. Researchers have focused on the prevention of cigarette smoking
      for several reasons. First, cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for such chronic
      diseases as coronary heart disease, cancer, and emphysema. Second, cigarette smoking is the
      most widespread form of drug dependence in our society. Third, cigarette smoking occurs
      toward the very beginning of the developmental progression of substance abuse and
      consequently is generally regarded to be one of the so-called 'gateway' substances.

      A recent review indicated that the most promising cigarette smoking prevention approaches
      focus on the psychosocial factors that promote initiation of cigarette smoking. Such
      approaches fall into two general categories: (a) those that focus on the social influences
      believed to promote substance use, and (b) those that provide coping skills training
      designed to enhance personal and social competence. Results of a recent 24-month study
      involving 689 sixth-grade elementary students showed that youths who received both health
      information and skills interventions had less intention to smoke and less cigarette use than
      youths who received no intervention or health information alone. Prior studies using
      peer-led models with seventh graders report similar results.

      The research literature on the effects of physical activity promotion is sparse. One of the
      few intervention studies on physical activity with school children to report increased
      endurance fitness and reduced body fat associated with an intensive daily physical program
      is the Australian Health and Fitness Study. This randomized, controlled trial was designed
      to compare the effects of integrated physical activity and health education programs on body
      fat, blood pressure, and endurance fitness in 10-year-old school children in primary schools
      located in Adelaide. The Oslo Youth Study was successful in designing and implementing
      within the school system a comprehensive health educational program involving grades 5-7.
      Positive results were obtained in the intervention group relative to the reference group
      with reductions in smoking onset, improved eating habits, and increased physical activity
      over a two-year period.

      Over the past ten years, school-based research studies have become more
      theoretically-grounded and have employed more sophisticated research design strategies and
      measurement techniques. The prevention of cigarette smoking has been the major focus of this
      research. There is still considerable need to build the base of scientific knowledge about
      the development of dietary, smoking, and exercise habits during childhood and about the
      interventions that are effective in school settings.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      CATCH consisted of a three-and-a-half year feasibility study conducted from September 1987
      through March 1991, the main trial beginning in April 1991, and the Tracking Study, in 1996
      a follow-up study to allow measurements on the cohort through ages 13 to 14 years. The
      purpose of the feasibility study was to test the acceptability of the interventions and
      measurements in 1,471 third, fourth, and fifth grade boys and girls, ages 7 to 11. The main
      components of the Phase I intervention programs at the eight schools included classroom
      curricula for the third, fourth, and fifth grades; home curricula designed to involve
      parents and children in CATCH activities at home and family fun nights to enhance family
      involvement; a physical activity program centered around a new physical activity curriculum;
      and a school nutrition program for school food service directors and staff. Blood samples
      were obtained from 1,045 children during risk factor screening. Other measurements included
      blood pressure, height, weight, triceps, and subscapular skinfolds. Nutrient intake was
      pilot-tested with an interactive 24-hour recall approach, supplemented by food records, a
      home food inventory, and follow-up calls to parents. Physical activity was measured with a
      physical activity interview and the Caltrac motion sensor.

      The main trial or Phase II, beginning in 1991 and ending in 1994, included two study groups,
      an Intervention Group and a Control Group, with a total of approximately 8,000 students. The
      measurement cohort included 5,107 students. The Intervention Group received a school-based
      program consisting of the CATCH curriculum, the physical education program, the school food
      service program, and programs to establish smoke-free schools. One-half of the Intervention
      Group received the same school-based program plus a family-based program. The Control Group
      received the usual health curriculum of the control schools but none of the CATCH
      interventions. The primary endpoints at the school level were reduction in fat and saturated
      fat in school lunches and increased moderate to vigorous activity in PE classes. The primary
      endpoint at the student level was serum cholesterol change between the third and fifth
      grades. Secondary endpoints included health knowledge, self-efficacy and behavioral skills
      that related to the adoption and maintenance of cardiovascular health behaviors; dietary fat
      intake; dietary sodium intake; physical activity; and systolic blood pressure. The unit of
      randomization was the elementary school. Schools were recruited for participation and then
      randomly assigned to the study groups. Twenty-four schools were recruited from each of the
      four participating field centers for a total of 96 schools. In each center, ten of 24
      schools were assigned to the Control Group and 14 to the Intervention Group. Among the 14
      intervention schools, seven were randomly assigned to the school-based intervention alone
      and seven to the school-based and family component. Measures of behavioral outcome and
      process variables were made during each grade from three through five. Physiological
      measurements were made at baseline in grade three and at the end of grade five. Final
      measurements were completed in May 1994. Close-out and final data analysis were conducted in
      the latter part of 1995 and in 1996. The major results paper was published in JAMA in March
      1996. Ten major mainstream papers were published in Preventive Medicine in 1996.

      The Tracking Study of CATCH III, beginning in December 1994, followed the cohort through
      early adolescence in the sixth through eighth grades. The objectives were to measure the
      effects of CATCH II intervention programs on subsequent smoking prevalence rates during the
      end of the eighth grade and to observe the onset, development, and inter-correlation of
      cardiovascular risk factors from early to middle adolescence in the cohort. There were no
      CATCH interventions. Psychosocial measures, dietary fitness, and smoking data were collected
      annually. The full panel of physiological measures and biochemical validation of smoking was
      conducted during the last semester of eighth grade. CATCH III ended in November 1999. The
      study was active through November 2000 under U01-HL-47098, the coordinating center.

      In August of 1996, a homocysteine substudy was added to CATCH. The substudy used serum
      samples collected in eighth graders in the spring of 1997 for analyses of homocysteine,
      folic acid, vitamin B-12, vitamin B-6, lipids, lipoproteins, blood pressure, weight and
      height. A mail survey was conducted to collect data on the children's family history of
      cardiovascular disease and vitamin supplementation. The results paper was published in JAMA
      in 1998.

      The CATCH-ON Study began in 1998. It's purpose was to assess the degree to which CATCH
      intervention goals (reduction of fat and saturated fat in school meals, increase in physical
      activity, no tobacco use, and implementation of the CATCH curriculum) were maintained or
      institutionalized in the original 56 CATCH intervention schools and in 20 control schools.
      CATCH-ON was Phase IV that ended March 31, 2001. To determine the influence of secular
      trends, the outcome measures were also assessed in 12 newly recruited (unexposed) schools.
      Measures of school climate, teacher and staff characteristics, school turbulence and school
      facilities and resources were assessed to help explain the variation in the degree of
      institutionalization in the CATCH intervention and control schools.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Schools from the CATCH Trial (76) or schools unexposed to CATCH (12).
