TITLE:
      Clinical Relevance of Microbleeds In Stroke
SUMMARY:
      Study I: CROMIS-2 (AF) Prospective cohort study of patients anticoagulated after
      cardioembolic stroke An observational inception cohort study (n=1425) of patients throughout
      the UK (79 hospitals) started on best practice oral anticoagulant (without prior use) for
      presumed cardioembolic ischaemic stroke due to non-valvular AF with follow up for the
      occurrence of intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH) and ischaemic stroke for an average of two
      years. The main baseline exposures (risk factors of interest) are the presence of cerebral
      microbleeds (CMBs) on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and genetic polymorphisms in
      candidate genes with potential functional relevance to ICH risk.

      Study II: CROMIS-2 (ICH) Observational and genetics study of intracerebral haemorrhage The
      investigators will also recruit 600 patients admitted to participating centres with ICH
      (with a target of at least 300 anticoagulant-related ICH cases) and collect DNA to increase
      the power of the genetic studies. The investigators will collect clinical and imaging data
      from these ICH cases to investigate risk factors associated with anticoagulant-related ICH
      compared to non anticoagulant-related ICH.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background Over the last decade, increasing use of oral anticoagulants to prevent
      cardioembolic ischaemic stroke due to atrial fibrillation (AF) in an ageing population has
      led to a five-fold increase in the incidence of anticoagulant-related intracranial
      haemorrhage (ICH) - a rare but unpredictable and catastrophic complication. Cerebral
      microbleeds (CMBs) on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may predict ICH risk, as may genetic
      polymorphisms influencing brain small-vessel integrity or anticoagulation stability.

      Aims To establish the value of CMBs and genetic factors in predicting symptomatic ICH
      following best practice oral anticoagulation to prevent recurrent ischaemic stroke due to
      AF.

      Methods CROMIS-2: Study I (AF) - Prospective, multicentre, inception cohort study in 1425
      patients with ischaemic stroke due to AF started on best practice oral anticoagulation.
      Patients will have genetic testing and standardized MRI including GRE at baseline, with
      follow-up by postal questionnaire (and clinical assessment or medical records surveillance
      after suspected events), and where possible there will be an in person clinical assessment
      at 2 years. The investigators will compare the rate of symptomatic ICH between CMB and
      CMB-free patients and test for associations with plausible candidate genes. The
      investigators aim to develop and validate a risk model to predict symptomatic ICH following
      best practice oral anticoagulation to prevent recurrent ischaemic stroke due to AF.

      CROMIS-2: Study II (ICH) - An observational study of ICH investigating genetic, clinical and
      radiological risk factors associated with anticoagulant-related ICH. The investigators will
      recruit patients admitted to participating centres with ICH (with a target of at least 300
      anticoagulant-related ICH cases) and collect DNA to increase the power of the genetic
      studies. The investigators will collect clinical and imaging data from these ICH cases to
      investigate risk factors associated with anticoagulant-related ICH compared to non
      anticoagulant-related ICH.

      Expected outcomes A successful predictive model for ICH risk after best practice oral
      anticoagulation for AF will help to determine whether genetic or CMB screening should be
      used in clinical practice and future trials. New genetic, clinical and radiological risk
      factors associated with anticoagulant-related ICH will be identified.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Study I: CROMIS-2 (AF)

        Inclusion criteria:

          -  Adult (≥18y; no upper limit) patients with a clinical diagnosis of non-valvular AF
             (verified by ECG) with intention to treat with best practice oral anticoagulants
             (e.g. warfarin)

          -  Previous ischaemic stroke or TIA diagnosed by treating clinician

          -  All patients must be able to have GRE MRI before (or within 1 week) of starting best
             practice oral anticoagulant

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Any MRI contraindications

          -  Previous use of oral anticoagulation

          -  Definite contra-indication to oral anticoagulation

          -  Serious head injury (resulting to loss of consciousness)

        Study II: CROMIS-2 (ICH)

        Inclusion criteria:

        • Adult (>18y) patients treated at participating centres with confirmed ICH (confirmed on
        CT or MRI scans) with or without a history of anticoagulant use at the time of the ICH

        Exclusion criteria:

          -  Known underlying structural cause for ICH (e.g arteriovenous malformation, tumour,
             cavernoma, intracranial aneurysm, haemorrhagic transformation of an infarct)

          -  Major head trauma (causing loss of consciousness and though to be sufficient to have
             caused the ICH) in previous 24 hours
