TITLE:
      Use of PiCCO System in Critically Ill Patients With Septic Shock and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
SUMMARY:
      PiCCO has been widely used in critical care settings for several decades. Together with
      pulmonary artery catheter, it is regarded as the important tool for guiding fluid management
      in patients with shock or acute respiratory distress syndrome. However, its effects on
      patients' outcome remain untested. The investigators study is a pilot study that is designed
      to test whether the use of PiCCO will improve patients' outcome, as compared to those
      without PiCCO monitoring.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      PiCCO comprises techniques of pulse contour analysis and transpulmonary thermodilution, and
      can provide important information on hemodynamics and pulmonary functions. It has been
      widely used in critical care settings for several decades. Together with pulmonary artery
      catheter (PAC), it is regarded as the important tool for guiding fluid management in
      patients with shock or acute respiratory distress syndrome. During last two decades, many
      well designed clinical trials have been conducted to see whether the use of PAC would
      benefit patient outcome. The result consistently showed that PAC added no benefit in terms
      of mortality, ICU length of stay, organ failure free survival days, and the length of
      mechanical ventilation. Since PiCCO is relatively new to PAC, and its effects on patients'
      outcome remain untested. The investigators study is a pilot study that is designed to test
      whether the use of PiCCO will improve patients' outcome, as compared to those without PiCCO
      monitoring.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients were included if they were diagnosed with Shock, Acute respiratory distress
        syndrome (ARDS), or both.

        Shock was defined by the presence 4 criteria:

          -  Heart rate of at least 90/min;

          -  A respiratory rate of at least 20/min or a PaCO2 of 32mmHg or lower or the use of
             mechanical ventilation;

          -  The use of vasopressors to maintain a systolic blood pressure of at least 90mmHg
             despite fluid resuscitation, low dose of dopamine (≤ 5 μg/kg per minute), or
             dobutamine;

          -  at least 1 of 3 signs of hypoperfusion (urine output < 0.5mL/kg of body weight per
             hour for 1 hour or more; neurologic dysfunction defined by confusion, psychosis, or a
             Glasgow coma scale score of ≤ 6; plasma lactate higher than the upper limit of the
             normal value).

        Acute respiratory distress syndrome：

          -  the presence of acute decrease in PaO2/FIO2 to 200mmHg or lower,

          -  bilateral pulmonary infiltrates or a chest radiograph consistent with edema;

          -  no clinical evidence of left atrial hypertension; and requirement for positive
             pressure ventilation.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients were moribund.

          -  signed do-not-resuscitation odor.
