TITLE:
      Study to Assess Efficacy of Nicorandil+Atenolol vs Atenolol in Treatment of Chronic Stable Angina.
SUMMARY:
      This study is to determine the anti-anginal and anti-ischemic effect of k-channel opener,
      nicorandil in patients of chronic stable angina.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Stress myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) is widely used for the diagnosis and risk
      assessment of patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease (CAD). Also, MPI
      lends itself to monitoring the effects of therapeutic interventions such as anti-ischemic
      medications, gene therapy, and various percutaneous and surgical revascularization
      modalities.

      The effects of nitrates, potassium channel activators, calcium-channel blockers, and
      beta-blockers on myocardial perfusion imaging are likely attributable to changes in
      myocardial blood flow and myocardial oxygen supply-demand ratio. The major anti-ischemic
      effect of BBs is a reduction in myocardial oxygen consumption both at rest and during
      stress. Beta-blockers decrease myocardial oxygen demand through a reduction in heart rate,
      blood pressure, and myocardial contractility. They also prolong diastole, therefore
      increasing coronary perfusion time. The effect of chronic atenolol use on dipyridamole SPECT
      MPI was assessed in a randomized, double-blind, crossover study that showed no difference in
      the perfusion defect size and severity between placebo and atenolol for the group as a
      whole, although one-third of patients had larger defects on atenolol than placebo. Bridges
      et al., 1992 (56)

      Nicorandil, a potassium channel activator, when given for 3 weeks exhibited significant
      improvement in myocardial perfusion in both MI and angina patients, on exercise thallium
      scan. Yamazaki et al., 1993 (69).

      Atenolol as shown in the cross over study does not affect myocardial perfusion significantly
      and hence combination therapy with nicorandil will help us to determine a significant
      benefit of nicorandil on MP. Results will be analyzed from base line in the same arm and the
      difference will be further compared with control arm.

      Guidelines suggest beta blockers as first line of therapy. To assess the anti ischemic
      effects of nicorandil, combination therapy with atenolol will be compared with atenolol
      alone. Since atenolol effect on MP is insignificant an added advantage of nicorandil can be
      evaluated in comparative study.

      Primary objective is to assess the anti ischemic effect of nicorandil.

      The primary endpoint is to compare the anti ischemic effect over 4 weeks period.

      Changes in perfusion will be evaluated in each arm at week 4 and comparison between the two
      study arms will be made to document the anti ischemic effects of nicorandil.

      Primary efficacy variables of the study are the difference of the following endpoints from
      the baseline at week 4 and comparison between control and study arm using Ex- SPECT MPI.

      Secondary efficacy variables of the study are the difference of the following endpoints from
      the baseline and comparison between control and study arm using ETT Bruce Protocol at week
      4.

      Secondary objectives of the study are to evaluate the anti anginal effect and safety of
      Nicorandil.

      This is an open label, randomized controlled pilot study. Sponsor of this study is Ferozsons
      Labs. Ltd. All participating patients must sign a written informed consent form.

      Eligible patients with proven CAD having at least one reversible or partially reversible
      myocardial perfusion defects on MPI SPECT - Tc-99m and functional class I & II of CSA, and
      laboratory values within predefined safety limits will be recruited.

      Chief exclusion criteria include presence of only fixed perfusion defects, CSA functional
      class III and IV and prior revascularization.

      A total of 40 patients will be enrolled in the study, 20 patients in each arm). Patients
      will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion to receive beta blocker in combination with nicorandil
      (experiment arm) or beta blocker (control arm) for four weeks until unacceptable toxicity,
      withdrawal of consent, whichever comes first.

      Nicorandil dose will be titrated from 10mg bd for 7days to 20mg bd for next 3 weeks.
      Concurrent therapy for angina attacks will be allowed to be used with study medication.

      All patients will have treadmill exercise using Bruce protocol. At peak exercise, 10-15 mCi
      of technetium - 99m tetrofosmin is injected and patient will exercise an additional 1 to 2
      minutes.. Stress SPECT images will be acquired beginning 15 to 45 minutes after the
      completion of treadmill stress. At rest 30 mCi of technetium-99m tetrofosmin will be
      injected and SPECT images will be acquired using same protocol.

      Study monitoring at the centre will be provided by the sponsor
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Patients of chronic stable angina with abnormal Exercise Myocardial Perfusion Spect
             Scan with reversible and partially reversible ischemic changes.

          2. Male and female

          3. Age 25 to 65 years

          4. Patient must understand and be willing, able and likely to comply with all study
             procedures and restrictions and comprehends the diary cards.

          5. Patient must be able to give voluntary written informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Hypertension of > 170/100 mm of Hg

          2. Valvular heart disease and cardiomyopathy

          3. Myocardial infarction in < 6 months

          4. Unstable angina

          5. Congestive cardiac failure

          6. Severe anemia (Hb 7G/dl)

          7. Cardiac arrhythmias or II or III degree AV block

          8. Significant liver or renal dysfunction

          9. IDDM (Type-1 diabetes mellitus)

         10. Systolic blood pressure < 100 mm Hg

         11. Pregnant and nursing women

         12. Known hypersensitivity to nicorandil

         13. On calcium channel blockers

         14. Patients not eligible for Tc 99m SPECT

         15. Patients in whom beta blockers are contraindicated

         16. Geographical inaccessibility for treatment or follow-up evaluations
