TITLE:
      Inhaled NO in Prevention of Chronic Lung Disease
SUMMARY:
      To test the hypothesis that low-dose inhaled nitric oxide administered to preterm infants
      who continue to require mechanical ventilation at 14 days of age will reduce the incidence
      of chronic lung disease.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Respiratory morbidity, particularly chronic lung disease (CLD), remains a major cause of
      long-term morbidity and mortality for preterm infants. Although surfactant replacement has
      decreased acute respiratory morbidity and mortality, it has not reduced the incidence of
      CLD. A number of other approaches, including antenatal thyrotropin releasing hormone in
      conjunction with corticosteroids, postnatal steroid administration, as well as
      administration of Vitamin E, diuretics, and bronchodilators, have not resulted in clinically
      important decreases in CLD. Infants with the most severe CLD go on to develop findings
      suggestive of pulmonary hypertension with cor pulmonale. There is preliminary evidence in
      the preterm infant with severe chronic lung disease that low-dose inhaled nitric oxide may
      significantly attenuate the disease and decrease mortality.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The multi-center, controlled and blinded trial investigates the hypothesis that low-dose
      inhaled nitric oxide administered to preterm infants between 500 and 1250 grams birth weight
      who continue to require mechanical ventilation at 10 days of age will increase survival
      without chronic lung disease (CLD) at 36 weeks post menstrual age. Secondary outcomes are
      duration of ventilation, oxygen requirement and duration of hospitalization. In addition,
      that there will be expected improvement in infant respiratory status (ventilatory support,
      airway resistance and compliance) associated with inhaled nitric oxide treatment. Indicators
      of inflammation and oxidant stress will be assessed by measurements of specific cytokines
      and protein modifications in tracheal aspirate and plasma samples, respectively. The safety
      of this therapy will be evaluated by assessing toxicity as measured by clinical bleeding,
      including intraventricular hemorrhage as well as the incidence of other morbidities of the
      preterm infant (necrotizing enterocolitis, retinopathy of prematurity and infection) and
      assessing neurodevelopmental outcome through two years of age. A total of 480 infants were
      randomized to either inhaled NO or placebo. In summary, this clinical trial will assess the
      efficacy and safety of inhaled nitric oxide for amelioration of a major disease of premature
      infants.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Preterm infants who are 500-1250 grams at birth and who require mechanical ventilation at
        10 to 21 days of age. Exclusions include congenital heart disease or pulmonary
        abnormalities, including a patent ductus arteriosus, ventilation solely for apnea,
        small-for-gestational age, or clinical bleeding.
