TITLE:
      Tamoxifen Study
SUMMARY:
      To assess the impact of tamoxifen on development of breast cancer, coronary heart disease,
      and bone fractures. The National Cancer Institute initiated the prevention trial under its
      National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP). The National Heart, Lung, and
      Blood Institute provided support to obtain blood pressure and lipid measurements, and
      lipoprotein and selected coagulation factor measurements in a subsample.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Tamoxifen is nominally called an 'anti-estrogen' although it has some estrogen-agonist
      activities and tends to increase plasma endogenous estrogen levels. Several studies have
      confirmed that it decreases plasma total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol and a review of
      mortality in patients taking tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for breast cancer indicates a
      decreased number of vascular deaths in women on tamoxifen compared to those not on this
      agent.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Subjects were randomized to receive 10 mg of tamoxifen two times a day or to placebo. The
      primary endpoint was prevention of invasive breast cancer. The secondary endpoint was the
      effects on fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events (coronary heart disease, stroke, and
      thromboembolic disease) and fractures. A total of 13,388 women at increased risk for breast
      cancer were randomly assigned to receive either tamoxifen (20 milligrams per day) or
      placebo. Cardiovascular follow-up was available for 13,194 women. The median follow-up was
      57 months; the mean follow-up was 49 months. During long-term follow-up, 76 percent of the
      tamoxifen participants were compliant with the study therapy; 83 percent were compliant
      through 24 months of follow-up. To evaluate the effects of tamoxifen in women with and
      without pre-existing heart disease, the 13,388 women enrolled at the 131 clinical sites were
      divided into subgroups of those with and without a self-reported history of clinical
      coronary heart disease, defined as myocardial infarction or angina prior to randomization.
      Medical records for subjects with suspected cardiovascular events were collected by the
      clinical sites and forwarded to the NSABP Operations Center for adjudication by
      investigators who were blinded to treatment assignment. Primary cardiovascular events
      included fatal myocardial infarction, Q-wave myocardial infarction, and non-Q-wave
      myocardial infarction. Secondary cardiovascular events included unstable angina (angina
      requiring hospitalization) and severe angina (angina requiring revascularization). All
      subjects were included in the analysis using the intent-to-treat principle.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Women over the age of 35 with a 5-year predicted breast cancer risk of at least 1.66
        percent or a history of lobular breast carcinoma in situ, life expectancy of 10 years or
        more, breast examination and mammogram without evidence of cancer, no hormonal therapy
        within three months prior to randomization, and no history of deep venous thrombosis or
        pulmonary embolism. .
