TITLE:
      Changes After Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitor Replacement by Angiotensin II Receptor Type I (AT1) Blocker
SUMMARY:
      It is supposed that the significant metabolic effects (improvement of insulin sensitivity)
      of hypertension therapy with renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers in humans are mediated
      mainly via changes in abdominal adipose tissue. This project is aimed to confirm the
      hypothesis that increased concentrations of circulatory angiotensin II after angiotensin II
      receptor type I (AT1) blockade leads, via stimulation of angiotensin II receptor type II
      (AT2), to activation of adipogenesis and improvement of insulin sensitivity. Therefore, in
      hypertensive patients, the components of RAS and the parameters of insulin sensitivity on
      systemic (in plasma) and local (in adipose tissue and in its interstitial fluid) level will
      be studied. The main aim of the study is to identify the changes occurring in patient before
      and 6 months after the conversion of therapy from angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
      inhibitors to AT1 receptor blockers. Observed parameters will include gene expression of RAS
      components, parameters of insulin sensitivity, amount, and cellularity of adipose tissue
      obtained by biopsy, evaluation of direct production of cytokines and angiotensins into the
      interstitial fluid of fat tissue obtained by microdialysis and evaluation of the selected
      parameters in plasma.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Arterial hypertension is nowadays considered a metabolic disease, due to its occurrence
      together with other risk factors of atherosclerosis like obesity, dyslipidemia, insulin
      resistance, impaired glucose regulation to diabetes mellitus type 2. These factors often
      result into the metabolic syndrome. Its pathogenetic mechanisms are not completely clarified
      yet, polygenic inheritance and environmental factors are probably involved. Therefore, from
      pathophysiological perspective of hypertension therapy a complex approach to the patient is
      needed. This approach requires the understanding of all known risk factors leading to the
      pharmacological and non-pharmacological intervention aimed to eliminate the risk factors of
      atherosclerosis. One of the main homeostatic systems participating in blood pressure
      regulation is the RAS.

      The present pharmacotherapy provides the possibility to influence the RAS through the
      inhibition of a) renin, b)ACE or c) through blockade of AT1 receptors.

        1. Renin inhibitors belong to the recent therapeutic approaches in hypertension treatment.
           Clinical studies, which could enable their use in daily practice, have not been
           completed yet.

        2. Inhibition of angiotensin converting enzyme prevents the transformation of angiotensin
           I (Ang I) to angiotensin II (Ang II), prevents the breakdown of vasodilatatory kinins,
           mainly bradykinin, leading to the NO-mediated vasodilatation. The positive effects of
           therapy with ACE inhibitors are based besides the decrease of circulating Ang II also
           on decreased influence of tissue Ang II, mainly in the vascular wall and on diminished
           norepinephrine release from neural terminals of autonomic nervous system (Noshiro et
           al. 1991). The ACE inhibitors reduce plasma Ang II levels, thus the AT1 and AT2
           receptors are less stimulated by the hormone leading to upregulation of the homologue
           ACE2, thereby increasing the production of angiotensin (1-7) (Ferrario et al. 2005).
           Angiotensin (1-7) binds to the AT1 as well as to the AT2 receptors and to its tentative
           AT(1-7) receptor.

           Some ACE inhibitors have a positive effect on improvement of glucose metabolism. The
           mechanism of improvement of insulin sensitivity has not been completely explained yet.
           It is supposed, that the positive insulin-sensitizing effects of ACE inhibitors could
           be mediated by hemodynamic changes - by improvement of skeletal muscle blood flow
           and/or by stimulation of insulin signaling pathways or by increasing the expression and
           the number of glucose transporter GLUT4. The improvement of insulin sensitivity during
           the therapy with ACE inhibitors correlated with the changes in the ion
           calcium/magnesium balance. The sympatholytic effect of the therapy with RAS inhibitors
           could also positively influence the metabolic parameters, supported by a study showing
           a decrease in serum epinephrine and an increase of insulin stimulated glucose uptake in
           normotensive volunteers treated with ACE inhibitor. In animal models of hypertension,
           the ACE inhibitors had a positive effect on reduction of free fatty acids levels and
           therefore a positive effect on insulin action.

        3. AT1 receptor blockade (by sartans) results in elevated plasma Ang II concentrations and
           to preferential stimulation of AT2 receptors. Compared to AT1, stimulation of AT2
           receptors exerts an antagonistic effect by inducing vasodilatation, apoptosis, and by
           inhibiting growth and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells. In addition, high
           Ang II concentrations seem to upregulate low levels or even re-express missing AT2
           receptors in adult rat adipose tissue. ACE2 expression is also upregulated under AT1
           blockade thus increased concentrations of angiotensin (1-7) in vivo in humans are
           assumed even not studied yet. Angiotensin (1-7) binds preferentially to non-blocked AT2
           receptors evoking additional depressor activity via kinin/NO/cGMP cascade inducing
           vasodilatation and improvement in hemodynamics.

      Overall, ACE inhibition exerts its beneficial effects on blood pressure via decreased Ang II
      concentrations and elevated bradykinin. On the other hand, blockade of AT1 receptors causes
      simultaneous overstimulation of AT2 receptors by elevated concentrations of Ang II,
      angiotensin (1-7) and angiotensin A having a positive effect on adipogenesis resulting in
      changes of regulatory mechanisms influencing the insulin action.

      The sartans have an insulin-sensitizing effect; their exact mechanism is unknown so far.
      Some of the AT1 receptor blockers display a weak peroxisome proliferator activator receptor
      (PPARγ) agonist activity which might promote the adipocyte differentiation. However, sartans
      without the PPARγ-agonist activity have a significant effect on adipocyte downsizing and
      improvement of insulin sensitivity markers as well. These results suggest that there may be
      a distinct mechanism, other than direct activation of PPARγ that is responsible for
      adipocyte differentiation and improvement of metabolic parameters.

      It is supposed that adipose tissue, except from systemic hemodynamic and sympatholytic
      effect is responsible for the insulin-sensitizing effect of sartans. In the last 20 years,
      the adipose tissue has been well studied, since it is no more considered only an energy
      storage but also a source of several substances - hormones, enzymes and bioactive peptides
      generally called adipokines.

      Human and rat adipose tissue contains complete local renin-angiotensin system (RAS).
      Components of adipose RAS undergo significant changes when the amount of adipose tissue and
      the adipocyte size enlarge. This leads to the assumption, that RAS plays an important role
      in regulation of adipose tissue mass. In vitro studies showed that Ang II inhibits adipocyte
      differentiation resulting in increased proportion of large insulin-resistant adipocytes and
      ectopic lipid deposition in other tissues. In the large adipocytes, expression and
      production of TNF is increased and adiponectin secretion inhibited through AT1 receptors.
      TNF is a cytokine impairing insulin action, highly expressed in adipose tissue in obesity
      and metabolic syndrome. It is known that the insulin sensitivity of adipocytes decreases
      with their size. RAS blockade stimulates adipogenesis in adipose tissue, probably via
      stimulation of AT2 receptors resulting in increased number of small insulin-sensitive cells.
      Several authors have observed a decrease in adipocyte size in retroperitoneal and epididymal
      adipose tissue in line with improved insulin sensitivity after RAS blockade in rats.
      Blockade of AT1 receptors in co-culture of human preadipocytes and adipocytes leaded also to
      increased adipogenesis. It is assumed that in vivo blockade of RAS might result in increased
      proportion of small adipocytes due to adipogenesis with simultaneous decrease in number of
      large cells due to apoptosis. The increased proportion of smaller adipocytes is reflected in
      changes of expression and release of adipokines producing more adiponectin and less TNF.
      Indeed, blockade of RAS elevates serum concentrations of adiponectin in patients with
      essential hypertension. In rats, serum concentrations as well as mRNA expression of
      adiponectin and PPARγ in adipose tissue increased. PPARγ plays probably a role in mechanisms
      related to the effect of RAS inhibition on changes in adipose tissue amount and its insulin
      sensitivity. In vivo in human body, to our knowledge these changes in production of RAS
      components in relation to adiposity and cellularity of the adipose tissue, to adipokines
      secretion and to parameters of insulin sensitivity have not been studied yet.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  essential hypertension

          -  ACE inhibitors

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  diabetes mellitus

          -  endocrinopathies

          -  no smokers
