TITLE:
      Progesterone Treatment in Female Smokers - 12
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to investigate progesterone effects in female smokers
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Limited research has been done on the effects of gender and menstrual cycle in response to
      drugs of abuse in humans. The main goal of this pilot study is to investigate the safety and
      tolerability of progesterone treatment in female nicotine users. In addition, plasma
      progesterone levels reached with a single 200 mg dose of progesterone treatment will be
      measured. The study will be a double-blind placebo controlled, crossover trial in which 12
      female smokers who are in the early follicular phase of their menstrual cycle will be
      enrolled. Druing the experimental sessions, subjects will be given a single 200 mg dose of
      micronized progesterone or placebo and multiple blood samples will be obtained to measure
      the plasma levels of progesterone. Starting 2 hours after progesterone or placebo treatment,
      subjects will have a self-administration period that will last around 2.5 hours. We
      hypothesize that administration of 200 mg of progesterone will achieve plasma progesterone
      concentrations similar to those found in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, 3-30
      ng/ml.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Female subjects aged 21-45 years with a smoking history of at least 20 cigarettes daily
        for at least 1 year. In good health as verified by medical history, screening examination,
        and screening laboratory tests. Not pregnant as determined by pregnancy screening nor
        breast feeding, and using acceptable birth control methods other than hormonal
        contraceptives.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        History of heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, COPD, liver diseases, abnormal
        vaginal bleeding, suspected or known breast malignancy, or any other medical condition
        which physician investigator deems inappropriate for subject participation. Use of regular
        psychotropic medication (antidepressants, antipsychotics, or anxiolytics) and recent
        psychiatric history. Amenorrhea. Current use of oral or other types of hormonal
        contraceptives. Abuse of alcohol or any other recreational or prescription drug. Regular
        use of any other tobacco products, including smokeless tobacco and nicotine products.
        Known allergy to progesterone or peanuts.
