TITLE:
      Treatment of Mild Hypertension Study (TOMHS)
SUMMARY:
      To compare the effects of nonpharmacologic therapy alone with those of one of five active
      drug regimens combined with non-pharmacologic therapy, for long- term management of patients
      with mild hypertension.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Dietary sodium reduction has a mild effect on the reduction of hypertension. Weight loss,
      while achievable in the short-run with diet alone, may also have only mild effects on
      hypertension and is very difficult to maintain with diet and/or behavior modification.
      Alteration of patients' lifestyles to decrease excessive alcohol intake is somewhat
      controversial. Medications, on the other hand, have clear benefits in terms of blood
      pressure lowering, and in the case of diuretics and beta-blockers, reduction in
      cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. However, there is concern about their justified use
      in mild hypertension since each one has side effects, some of which may have long-term
      implications, such as alteration in serum lipids. Newer classes of drugs--calcium
      antagonists, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, alpha blockers--had not previously
      been compared long-term with diuretics and beta-blockers.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      TOMHS I enrolled 902 men and women to determine the feasibility of a larger trial.
      Participants were randomized in a double-blind manner to one of six treatment groups and
      within two strata. Stratum I was for participants not on antihypertensive drugs and Stratum
      II for those on antihypertensive drugs at initial screening. There were six treatment arms:
      placebo, a diuretic (chlorthalidone), a beta-adrenergic blocking agent (acebutolol), an
      alpha blocker (doxazosin mesylate), a calcium antagonist (amlodipine maleate), and an
      angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (enalapril maleate). All participants received a
      lifestyle intervention program that included reduction of sodium chloride and alcohol intake
      as well as weight reduction and increase in physical activity. All participants were
      followed for at least 48 months, with an average of 54 months. The primary endpoint was
      lowering of blood pressure. The treatments were also compared for effects on blood
      chemistries including lipoproteins, echocardiographic left ventricular mass, ventricular
      ectopic activity and ST-T changes of ischemia as measured by ambulatory ECG monitoring, side
      effects, and quality of life. Randomization took place between October 1986 and March 1988.
      Active follow-up ended in March-April 1992. Data analysis ended in May 1994.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 45 to 69, with mild hypertension (diastolic blood pressure of 90-99 mm
        Hg at two of three visits for untreated individuals. Patients who received drug therapy
        must have had a DBP less than 95 mm Hg two to four weeks after drug.
