TITLE:
      Diagnosis and Follow-up of Patients With Subclinical Hypothyroidism
SUMMARY:
      Long term follow-up of the patients with delayed TSH elevation or subclinical hypothyroidism
      has been seldom reported. The purpose of this study was to explore the diagnostic criteria
      for subclinical hypothyroidism and the initial dosage of L-thyroxine through long-term
      follow up for infants with subclinical hypothyroidism ，and evaluate the curative effect.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Long term follow-up of the patients with delayed TSH elevation or subclinical hypothyroidism
      has been seldom reported. The purpose of this study was to explore the diagnostic criteria
      for subclinical hypothyroidism and the initial dosage of L-thyroxine through long-term
      follow up for infants with hyperthyrotropinemia，and evaluate the curative effect.All
      live-born neonates in province took part in the screening program from October, 1999 to
      September ,2006. Laboratory tests are performed as a time resolved fluoro-immunoassay
      (TRFIA). TSH is measured with a cut-off > 9 mU/L. The diagnostic standard for subclinical
      hypothyroidism was: TSH ≥ 20 mU/L, T3 and T4 normal or low-normal ,or TSH > 5.6 mU/L and <
      20 mU/L on initial determination and on follow-up or TSH levels increase on follow-up and/or
      gradually declining T4 levels.L-Thyroxine was administered for substitution therapy. After 2
      years therapy，allround evaluation was performed. Compare the correlation to effects with
      different level of TSH、starting time of therapy and environment. Compare the effects between
      subclinical、temporary and permanent hypothyroidism.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  The diagnostic standard for manifest hypothyroidism and subclinical hypothyroidism
             was defined as follows:

               -  Hypothyroidism - TSH > 40 mU/L and T3 and T4 below the reference range or TSH >
                  40 mU/L, T3 normal and T4 below the reference range [2]

               -  Subclinical hypothyroidism - TSH ≥ 20 mU/L, T3 and T4 normal or low-normal or
                  TSH > 5.6 mU/L and < 20 mU/L on initial determination and on follow-up or TSH
                  levels increase on follow-up and/or gradually declining T4 levels.
