TITLE:
      A Phase I Study to Evaluate the Safety and Immunogenicity of Recombinant HIV-1 Envelope Antigen in Children Born to HIV-Infected Mothers
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: To determine the safety of envelope recombinant proteins rgp120/HIV-1MN (Genentech)
      and rgp120/HIV-1SF2 (Chiron/Biocine) in infants who are of indeterminate HIV status born to
      HIV-infected women. To evaluate changes in viral load in infants proven to be infected and
      absolute CD4 counts in all immunized infants.

      SECONDARY: To evaluate the immunogenicity of these envelope recombinant proteins in infants
      of indeterminate HIV status born to HIV-infected women.

      Only 30-50 percent of HIV-infected infants have detectable virus at birth. Successful early
      sensitization to HIV envelope epitopes may help prevent infection or, alternatively, may
      enhance HIV-specific immune function to alter HIV replication and disease progression.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Only 30-50 percent of HIV-infected infants have detectable virus at birth. Successful early
      sensitization to HIV envelope epitopes may help prevent infection or, alternatively, may
      enhance HIV-specific immune function to alter HIV replication and disease progression.

      Newborns are randomized to one of three different doses of either rgp120/HIV-1MN or
      rgp120/HIV-1SF2 or their matching placebos. At each dose level, 12 patients receive vaccine
      and three patients receive placebo. Immunizations are performed at 0, 4, 12, and 20 weeks,
      and patients are followed until 2 years of age. Three of four patients treated at a given
      dose level must have received two immunizations without evidence of grade 3 or 4 clinical or
      laboratory toxicity before dose escalation occurs. Twelve additional patients are treated
      with the optimal dose of each vaccine at weeks 0, 2, 8, and 20 (An accelerated schedule PER
      AMENDMENT 3/20/96. Changed from - 0, 4, 8, and 20) accompanied by three additional placebo
      patients per vaccine. PER AMENDMENT 3/20/96: The optimal dose of rgp120/HIV-1MN is 100 mcg
      and will be given to the 12 patients and the placebo will be given to 3. The optimal dose of
      rgp120/HIV-1SF2 is 5 mcg and will be given to the 12 patients and the placebo will be given
      to 3.

      PER 2/3/95 AMENDMENT: After the initial patients are enrolled, 18 additional newborns will
      be randomized to one of the three dose levels of rgp120/HIV-1MN (with no placebos). PER
      AMENDMENT 6/5/95: Another group of 18 newborns will be randomized to one of three treatments
      representing 3 different doses of the Chiron/Biocine vaccine (with no placebos).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Antiretroviral therapy.

          -  Coenrollment in a therapeutic protocol if begun at least 30 days following the week
             20 immunization.

          -  Routine immunizations if given more than 1 week before or after study vaccine.

        Patients must be:

          -  > 37 weeks gestation and < 72 hours of age born to HIV-infected women.

          -  NOT born to women who received either passive or active immunotherapy during
             pregnancy.

          -  NOT breast-fed.

          -  NOT born to women who are hepatitis B surface antigen positive.

          -  Receiving AZT at study entry (except infants enrolled in ACTG 076).

        NOTE:

          -  Parent or guardian must provide informed consent and be willing to comply with study
             requirements.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Documented or suspected serious bacterial infection, metabolic illness, or other
             immediate life-threatening conditions.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Passive or active HIV-specific immunotherapy other than the study candidate vaccines.

          -  Investigational medications.
