TITLE:
      Harvard Atherosclerosis Reversibility Project (HARP)
SUMMARY:
      To determine by sequential coronary arteriography whether a lipid-lowering diet with and
      without lipid-lowering drugs could reverse coronary artery disease in normocholesterolemic
      patients. Also, to test whether fish oil supplements could improve human coronary
      atherosclerosis. Finally, to determine the effect of combination therapy with lipid-reducing
      drugs in patients with coronary heart disease and "normal" cholesterol levels. At least
      three clinical trials were conducted.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The prognosis of patients with coronary heart disease is closely related to the degree of
      coronary luminal obstruction. In population studies, the incidence and severity of coronary
      atherosclerosis on angiography is correlated with diet and plasma lipoprotein cholesterol.
      Previous clinical trials had shown that treatments that lowered plasma concentrations of low
      density lipoprotein cholesterol benefited some hypercholesterolemic patients with coronary
      heart disease. No similar benefit had been demonstrated in normocholesterolemic patients who
      make up the majority of patients with coronary heart disease.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      In the cholesterol-lowering agent trial, all patients received Step 1 dietary instruction
      before randomization and every three months thereafter. Randomization was stratified by
      medical or surgical treatment for coronary disease and the ratio of total to HDL
      cholesterol. A total of 39 patients were assigned to placebo and 40 to active treatment with
      pravastatin, nicotinic acid, cholestyramine, and gemfibrozil stepwise as needed to reach the
      specified goal (total cholesterol less than or equal to 4.1 mmol/L, ratio of LDL/HDL
      cholesterol less than or equal to 2.0). Lipid concentrations were measured every six weeks.
      Baseline angiograms were compared to angiograms taken at 30 months.

      In the fish oil trial, 41 patients were randomized to fish oil capsules containing 6 grams
      of n-3 fatty acids daily and 39 patients were randomized to olive oil placebo capsules for
      an average duration of 28 months. Each fish oil capsule contained 500 mg of n-3
      polyunsaturated fatty acids composed of 240 mg of eicosapentaenoic acid, 160 mg of
      docosahexaenoic acid, and 100 mg of mainly docosapentaenoic acid. Randomization was
      stratified by medical or surgical treatment for coronary disease and the ratio of total to
      HDL cholesterol. The primary outcome variable was change in minimal diameter of coronary
      artery lesions expressed as a continuous variable. During the initial hospital stay for
      catheterization, dietary instruction was provided to every patient according to the National
      Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Step 1 guidelines. A seven-day diet record was
      collected at the randomization visit and every three months during the trial. Every twelve
      weeks, a research nurse reviewed with the patients side effects, diet, and concomitant
      medications and performed a pill count. Every 24 weeks, the patients received an interval
      medical history and physical examination by a physician. A fasting blood sample was obtained
      for lipid analysis at the 12- and 24-week visits and every 24 weeks thereafter. If the total
      cholesterol level of any patient increased to 250 mg/dl (6.43 mmol/liter) or greater on two
      consecutive measurements, intensified dietary instruction was given, followed by drug
      therapy with cholestyramine or nicotinic acid or both as needed to lower total cholesterol
      to less than 250 mg/dl. Twenty-one patients did not complete the protocol due to death,
      refusal to undergo the second cardiac catheterization, development of medical conditions
      precluding participation, intolerance to the capsules, and a missing initial angiogram.

      In the combination therapy trial, patients were randomized to usual care or to stepped-care
      drug therapy with lipid-lowering agents including pravastatin, nicotinic acid,
      cholestyramine, and gemfibrozil to decrease total cholesterol levels to less than 160 mg/dl
      and the ratio of low density lipoprotein cholesterol to high density lipoprotein cholesterol
      to less than 2.0. Measurements included fasting serum lipoprotein profile, fasting
      apolipoprotein levels, and frequency of adverse effects. Patients were assessed every six
      weeks during drug titration and every three months thereafter for two -and-a-half years.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, normocholesterolemic, with 30 percent or greater narrowing of a coronary
        artery lumen as revealed by angiography. (Cholesterol-Lowering Agent Trial).

        Men and women with angiographically-documented coronary heart disease (Fish Oil Tr
