TITLE:
      Training Levels Comparison Trial
SUMMARY:
      To determine the effects of high or low intensity long-term exercise conditioning in
      patients with coronary artery disease.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      A vast amount of literature exists on the improvements in work capacity, reduction of risk
      factors, and an increased feeling of well-being among coronary heart disease patients after
      physical training programs. Previous observations of short-term training programs which
      resulted in an increase in physical working capacity have not usually shown a cardiac
      change. The National Exercise and Heart Disease Project did not show such changes, but the
      exercise level may have been inadequate. Several other studies suggested that more prolonged
      and intense training could result in improved cardiac function.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Patients were randomized to high intensity or low intensity long-term exercise groups.
      Compliance was strengthened by randomizing following a sequence of eligibility visits and
      after a test period of subject reaction to an exercise program. The primary endpoint was
      change in exercise ejection fraction at one year. Secondary endpoints included changes in
      lipid levels, body composition, blood pressure and heart rate measurements, glucose
      tolerance, quality of life measures, compliance, and progression of disease. Patients were
      classified into one of four strata based on the documented history of myocardial infarction
      and resting left ventricular ejection fraction. Within each stratum, patients were assigned
      in equal numbers to the two intensity levels of exercise intervention. All exercise
      prescriptions were based on exercise testing of patients maintained on their usual medical
      regimen including drugs. Patients underwent standardized multistage treadmill exercise
      testing monitored by Doppler echocardiogram at baseline, just prior to randomization and at
      the three month, six month, one year and two year visits. Patients participated in the
      structured group exercise sessions three days per week. Each exercise session was preceded
      by and ended with a five to fifteen minute warm-up and cool-down session. Each patient was
      given an exercise prescription that included a 30 minute period of walking or of walking and
      jogging sequences and 15 minutes of arm-leg bicycle ergometer exercise. Recruitment started
      in May 1987. The last patient was enrolled in March 1990.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men, ages 30 to 67, with documented coronary heart disease.
