TITLE:
      Efficacy Study of Assiut Femoral Compression Device Versus Manual Compression in the Achievement of Hemostasis
SUMMARY:
      This study was performed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a locally designed Assiut
      Femoral Compression Device (AFCD) versus manual compression (MC). Femoral compression
      devices have been developed thorough the past decades without being strongly implemented in
      the catheterization laboratory. Their limited adoption reflects concerns of high cost and
      conflicting data regarding their safety
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The intra-arterial sheaths were removed 6 hours after PCI in the MC group according to the
      standard local protocols. However for AFCD group, the sheaths were removed 2 hours after PCI
      instead of conventional 6 hours. To standardize compression times, AFCD were applied to
      patient and complete femoral artery compression were applied for 5 minutes, followed by a
      gradual release of pressure till distal pulse is palpated. Each patient received a minimum
      of 13 minutes of compression, with further compression applied only if full hemostasis had
      not been achieved at that point with maximum of 30 minutes.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients between 18 and 85 years of age,

          -  Scheduled to undergo an elective PCI via arterial puncture of common femoral artery
             were eligible for enrollment in the study.

          -  Elective PCI was defined as any coronary revascularization in a low-risk patient who
             presents to the facility for a planned PCI or for a coronary angiogram followed by ad
             hoc PCI.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        Patients were excluded from the study if the patient has

          1. Any procedural complication included:

               -  prolonged chest pain,

               -  transient coronary artery closure, no-flow or slow-flow phenomenon,

               -  hemodynamic instability,

               -  persistent electrocardiographic changes,

               -  side-branch occlusion of >1.5 mm, or

               -  an angiographically suboptimal result,

          2. Arterial access other than the right or left femoral artery ,

          3. Vascular perforation, thrombosis during procedure ,

          4. Patients with high risk of puncture site complications as:

               -  Bleeding diathesis,

               -  International normalized ratio >1.5,

               -  Recent thrombolysis,

               -  Low platelet count,

               -  Hematoma at the end of the procedure,

               -  Previous iliofemoral artery surgery or any peripheral vascular Surgery,

               -  Previous femoral artery complication from angiography, and

          5. Uncontrolled hypertension at time of procedure (>180/>110).
