TITLE:
      The Neuromarker S-100B in Patients With Different Types of Intracranial Injury
SUMMARY:
      Abstract:

      The most widely studied neuro-markers in traumatic brain injury (TBI) are S100B and neurone
      specific enolase (NSE). S-100B is localized in astroglia. This marker is used to predict
      neuronal damage caused by traumatic brain injury. The investigators conduct a study to
      derive and validate the measurement of S-100B in serum of patients with different types
      traumatic brain injuries.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The neuromarker S-100B is a well established tool for decision making in patients traumatic
      brain injury (TBI)in Europe. In many hospitals S-100B is used routinely as a part of a set
      of high- and medium risk factors aiding the decision to perform a cranial computed
      tomography (CCT) in patients with minor head injury (MHI). In patients with severe head
      injury Raabe et al. found a significant correlation between the S-100B levels and
      unfavourable outcome in patients with severe brain injury with serum levels higher than 0.50
      μg/l measured 24h after injury. The average level of the neuromarker, compared with other
      studies. The study of Biberthaler et al. showed highest levels in patients with epidural
      hematomas, followed by subdural, subarachnoidal and intracerebral hematomas. On the contrary
      the average S-100B levels of patients with epidural hematomas featured in a study by Unden
      et al. published in 2005 displayed normal levels (<0.2 μg/L). They concluded that S-100B was
      unreliable as a marker for epidural hematomas.

      Aim of the study Validation of S-100B in patients with intracerebral, epidural, subdural,
      and subarachnoidal hematoma, brain edema and concussion (Group 1-6), to find evidence which
      kind of injury leads to which level of elevation of the neuromarker measured in peripheral
      blood.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  all patients with traumatic brain injury

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  patients without traumatic brain injury
