TITLE:
      Chemoprevention of Anal Neoplasia Arising Secondary to Anogenital Human Papillomavirus Infection in Persons With HIV Infection.
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: In Phase I, to define a broadly tolerable dose of isotretinoin that can be used in
      combination with interferon alfa-2a (IFN alfa-2a). In Phase II, to determine trends in
      efficacy of isotretinoin alone or in combination with IFN alfa-2a as chemoprevention
      (preventing progression or recurrence) of anal intraepithelial neoplasia ( AIN ) / squamous
      intraepithelial lesions ( SIL ) in patients with HIV infection.

      SECONDARY: To evaluate the effects of isotretinoin alone or in combination with IFN alfa-2a
      on immune function markers, human papillomavirus (HPV) type, and HPV DNA levels.

      Patients with HIV infection have a significant risk of recurrence following local ablation
      of intraepithelial neoplasia; thus, anogenital epithelial may become an increasingly
      important cause of morbidity, and possibly mortality, as the HIV epidemic matures. Clinical
      studies of non-HIV-infected subjects have established that synthetic retinoids inhibit the
      progression of epithelial preneoplastic conditions and some neoplastic states.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Patients with HIV infection have a significant risk of recurrence following local ablation
      of intraepithelial neoplasia; thus, anogenital epithelial may become an increasingly
      important cause of morbidity, and possibly mortality, as the HIV epidemic matures. Clinical
      studies of non-HIV-infected subjects have established that synthetic retinoids inhibit the
      progression of epithelial preneoplastic conditions and some neoplastic states.

      In the Phase I portion of the study, 20 patients per site each receive isotretinoin in
      escalating doses. If a patient experiences grade 2 or worse toxicity (or grade 3 or worse
      hypertriglyceridemia), dose is reduced to the previously tolerated dose for the remainder of
      the 6 week period. Patients are then reassessed for anal neoplasia; those with no
      progression and no grade 2 or worse toxicity receive an additional 6 weeks of isotretinoin
      in combination with interferon alfa-2a. For Phase II of the study, a separate group of
      patients who have undergone ablative therapy are randomized to one of three arms (26
      patients/arm): isotretinoin alone at the dose tolerated by at least 60 percent of patients
      in Phase I; isotretinoin plus interferon alfa-2a; or observation only. Treatment continues
      for 48 weeks.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  PCP prophylaxis (required for patients with CD4 count < 200 cells/mm3).

          -  Chemoprophylaxis for candidiasis and herpes simplex.

          -  Metronidazole for up to 14 days.

          -  Erythropoietin.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV seropositivity.

          -  NO active opportunistic infection requiring treatment with prohibited drugs.

          -  Phase I - Current grade 1 AIN (i.e., low grade SIL) OR treated or untreated grade 2
             or 3 AIN (i.e., high grade SIL).

        Phase II - Prior histologically confirmed grade 2 or 3 AIN / high grade SIL, with ablative
        therapy within the past 30-90 days.

          -  Capability of complying with study protocol.

        NOTE:

          -  The terms condyloma, grade 1 AIN, and low grade SIL are interchangeable. Grade 2 or 3
             AIN is interchangeable with high grade SIL.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Active medical problems for which the patient is undergoing evaluations or for which
             prohibited therapy is required.

          -  Other active malignancies requiring systemic therapy.

          -  Significant symptomatic cardiac disease.

        NOTE:

          -  Patients with malignancies being managed with local therapy (e.g., Kaposi's sarcoma,
             basal cell carcinoma) may enroll at the discretion of the site investigator.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  G-CSF (filgrastim).

          -  Myelosuppressive antibiotics (except co-trimoxazole for PCP prophylaxis).

          -  Corticosteroids.

          -  Biologic response modifiers.

          -  Cytotoxic chemotherapy.

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Radiation therapy.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

        History of ventricular arrhythmias or myocardial infarction.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded within 20 days prior to study entry:

          -  G-CSF (filgrastim).

          -  Myelosuppressive antibiotics (except co-trimoxazole for PCP prophylaxis).

          -  Corticosteroids.

          -  Biologic response modifiers.

          -  Cytotoxic chemotherapy.

        Prior Treatment:

        Excluded within 20 days prior to study entry:

          -  Radiation therapy.

        Excluded within 14 days prior to study entry:

          -  Transfusion.

        Active substance abuse or illegal drug use (alcohol consumption is strongly discouraged).
