TITLE:
      Tobacco Dependence in Alcoholism Treatment (Nicotine Patch/Naltrexone)
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine the effectiveness of naltrexone (Revia) in
      reducing drinking and smoking in patients with both nicotine and alcohol dependence.

      Individuals will be randomly assigned to a 12-week trial of a fixed daily dose of either
      naltrexone (Revia) and nicotine replacement patch or placebos. All individuals will receive
      weekly coping skills and smoking-cessation behavioral therapy. Followup interviews will be
      conducted 3 and 6 months after treatment to determine smoking and drinking status and
      persistence of any dependence symptoms.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for alcohol dependence and nicotine dependence.

          -  Expresses a desire to cut down or stop drinking and smoking.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Currently meets criteria for dependence on substances other than alcohol and
             nicotine.

          -  Any history of opiate dependence or evidence of current opiate use.

          -  Significant medical disorders that will increase potential risk or interfere with
             study participation.

          -  Liver function tests more than 3 times normal or elevated bilirubin.

          -  Females who are pregnant, nursing, or not using a reliable method of birth control.

          -  Meets criteria for a major psychiatric disorder and is in need of or currently
             undergoing drug therapy.

          -  Inability to understand and/or comply with the provisions of the protocol and consent
             form.

          -  Treatment with an investigational drug during the previous month.

          -  Chronic treatment with any narcotic-containing medications during the previous month.

          -  Sensitivity to drug as evidenced by adverse drug experiences especially with
             narcotic- containing analgesics or opioid antagonists.

          -  Current treatment with disulfiram (Antabuse) or nicotine replacement therapy.

          -  More than 6 weeks of abstinence.
