TITLE:
      My Health Coach Study
SUMMARY:
      The "My Health Coach Study" seeks to determine if health coaching by a medical assistant can
      help patients have better sleep, a better diet, be more physically active or lose weight,
      according to the recommendation of their health care provider.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The aim of the study is to determine whether medical assistants (MAs) can assist primary
      care providers to achieve healthier lifestyles via better sleep, food choices, weight loss
      and/or increased physical activity in their patients. The hypothesis driving this research
      is that health coaching can be done by existing medical support staff to facilitate healthy
      lifestyles in a primary care setting. Coaching can maximize the health of the patient
      population in a cost-effective way if the coaching service is integrated into primary care
      clinics with minimal capital investment at the outset. A major focus will be on behaviors
      associated with weight management since this is the most common health issue in the U.S.
      today. This method, if successful, should be easily adaptable to other health behaviors and
      in most any medical practice that seeks to improve the health of its patient base in a
      cost-effective way.

      In order to achieve a change in health behaviors, and especially weight loss, regular
      follow-up contacts are needed. Previous research has shown health coaching to be effective,
      but this has utilized programs that "add on" to the existing clinic structure. This type of
      coaching model is difficult to sustain. Utilizing existing staff for health coaching is a
      method we propose to more fully integrate this service into primary care clinics.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  adults age 21 and over

          -  referred by primary care physician for health coaching

          -  have telephone for follow-up

          -  English speaking

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  pregnant or trying to become pregnant
