TITLE:
      Stanford Coronary Risk Intervention Project (SCRIP)
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether modification of risk factors altered the rate of progression of
      coronary artery disease in arteries with mild atherosclerosis and no mechanical intervention
      in patients who had coronary bypass surgery or percutaneous transluminal coronary
      angioplasty (PTCA).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Because of difficulties with quantitative measurement and with feasibility of follow-up, few
      controlled studies prior to SCRIP had been completed to determine the impact of risk factor
      modification directly on the progression of coronary atherosclerosis in humans. Suggestive
      evidence existed from animal studies, especially in primates, that diet and exercise altered
      atherosclerosis as a result of risk modification. But these animal models did not accurately
      represent the potential for modifying the coronary atherosclerotic process in humans. Some
      indirect evidence had been developed in humans by studying arteries more accessible than the
      coronaries. In the several preliminary studies reported using coronary arteriography to
      study the impact of risk modification on atherosclerosis, the results had been encouraging
      but far from definitive. One angiographic follow-up study of vein bypass grafts and severely
      atherosclerotic coronary arteries reported improvement with lipid lowering therapy. None of
      these studies had included randomization of patients to systematic, intense, long-term risk
      reduction versus usual care with prospectively identified coronary artery segments with mild
      disease.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, fixed-sample. A total of 300 patients were randomized, 155 to usual care (UC) in
      the community and 145 to special intervention (SI). The SI group received intensive efforts
      directed at reducing or eliminating risk factors, including lowering LDL-cholesterol and
      increasing HDL-cholesterol, reducing blood pressure, eliminating cigarette smoking and
      obesity, increasing exercise, and decreasing stressful life experience. The major endpoint
      was the rate of coronary artery disease progression as measured by angiography, at baseline
      and at forty-eight months. Follow-up was for four years.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, up to 75 years of age. Patients with coronary artery disease but no
        mechanical intervention on all major vessels.
