TITLE:
      Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)
SUMMARY:
      To test the effectiveness of dietary patterns in lowering blood pressure.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The strong relationship between diet and blood pressure and the risk of hypertension has
      been well recognized. Currently, three specific diet-related factors have been recommended
      by the Joint National Committee on High Blood Pressure as a first-line approach in
      preventing and treating hypertension: caloric restriction for weight reduction, reduced
      consumption of alcohol, and lower sodium intake. Many studies, primarily observational, have
      shown significant associations between blood pressure and other diet-related factors,
      including micronutrients such as potassium, calcium, and magnesium; macronutrients such as
      type and amount of dietary fats, particularly polyunsaturated, and protein; and dietary
      fiber. However, results from individual, randomized, controlled clinical trials testing the
      effects of these nutrients on blood pressure have been inconsistent and equivocal. On the
      other hand, both observational and randomized intervention studies have consistently linked
      vegetarian dietary patterns to lower blood pressure.

      To determine which specific dietary component may account for the blood pressure-lowering
      effect produced by vegetarian diets, numerous studies have examined individual
      micronutrients, macronutrients, and fiber. A large majority of cross-cultural and
      observational studies have shown a significant inverse association of blood pressure with
      the micronutrients, potassium, calcium, and magnesium, while the evidence linking dietary
      fiber to lower blood pressure comes primarily from studies on vegetarian and other high
      fiber diets. However, only a few of numerous clinical trials found that potassium or calcium
      supplements lower blood pressure. Randomized trials of magnesium supplementation generally
      have not shown a significant reduction in blood pressure. The few intervention studies of
      fiber supplements likewise generally have not demonstrated significant lowering of blood
      pressure. Pooled estimates from meta-analyses of potassium and calcium trials have reported
      small but significant reductions in systolic (potassium and calcium) and diastolic
      (potassium) blood pressure. All of these results are compatible with small effects of
      individual dietary components.

      Only a few observational and intervention studies have demonstrated a relationship between
      the macronutrients, dietary fats or protein, and blood pressure. However, recent data
      analyses shown significant direct associations with saturated fat and dietary cholesterol,
      and inverse associations with protein intake.

      Thus, an overall summary of the literature suggests that there is strong potential for a
      number of macronutrients and micronutrients to play an important role in reducing blood
      pressure. Testing dietary patterns rather than specific nutrients is a promising approach
      because it is not yet known which nutrients might be most effective in lowering blood
      pressure and because the effect of individual nutrients may be small. Testing dietary
      patterns would naturally include several nutrients that cumulatively are likely to lower
      blood pressure. Furthermore, most intervention studies which have not demonstrated decreases
      in blood pressure from individual nutrients used supplements rather than foods. Therefore,
      it may be important to test nutrients as components of foods and dietary patterns and not as
      isolated or processed nutrients.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      DASH, a randomized, multicenter, controlled trial, compared the effects of three dietary
      patterns on blood pressure. The study design consisted of a three-week run-in period during
      which eligible participants were provided a diet that approximated a typical American diet
      in nutrient content. After run-in, eligible participants were randomized to one of three
      dietary patterns which lasted for eight weeks: a 'typical' American diet in which the
      macronutrient and fiber content reflected current United States consumption and was
      relatively low in calcium, potassium, and magnesium; a diet that was high in fruits and
      vegetables, and therefore high in potassium, magnesium, and fiber. The macronutrient and
      calcium content of this diet otherwise resembled that of the typical American diet. The
      third diet, termed the DASH diet, was high in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy
      products, and had a favorable macronutrient profile. This diet was low in saturated fat,
      total fat, and cholesterol, was moderately high in protein, and had a high content of
      calcium, potassium, magnesium, and fiber. All three diets had about 3 grams of sodium
      daily--slightly below the average U.S. consumption-- and all included fresh, frozen, canned,
      and dried foods. None of the diets was vegetarian or used specialty foods containing fat
      substitutes. Alcohol and caffeine-containing beverages were limited and monitored. Because
      it was important that good compliance to the diet be assured, food was provided to the
      free-living study participants. The primary endpoint was change in diastolic blood pressure
      from baseline to the end of the study. The study compared the changes in diastolic blood
      pressure among the three dietary patterns. Screening began in June 1994. Randomization began
      in September 1994 and was expected to take two years. Support for the trial ended in July
      1997.

      NHLBI funded an ancillary study of DASH entitled, Folic Acid Dose Response. The purpose of
      the study was to determine the dose-response relationship between dietary folic acid intake
      and plasma folate and homocysteine. A total of 133 healthy people aged 60 years or older
      were enrolled. Participants were assigned to either 0, 100, 400, 1000, or 2000 micrograms of
      folic acid for 6 weeks. Study participants were newly recruited and were not DASH
      participants.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women with higher than optimal diastolic blood pressure or with Stage 1 (mild)
        hypertension.
