TITLE:
      Prevention of Hypertension: A Randomized Trial
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether improved nutrition to correct overweight and high sodium intake, and
      regular frequent moderate rhythmic exercise to improve cardio-pulmonary fitness and to slow
      heart rate could lower blood pressure and prevent development of hypertension in
      hypertension-prone individuals.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Diet modification is one of the strategies in the primary prevention of hypertension.
      Studies of the association between various factors and blood pressure in different
      populations have shown the occurrence of specific dietary factors associated with elevated
      blood pressures. The factors include overweight, alcohol consumption and high sodium intake.
      Heart rate is also an independent predictor of risk of hypertension. Diet and exercise are
      amenable to intervention to influence blood pressure with the aim of reducing the risk of
      developing hypertension.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      In the first phase of the trial participants were randomized to a Monitored (Control) Group
      or to an Intervention Group receiving individualized intervention to achieve changes in diet
      and physical activity. The goals of the Intervention Group were: a reduction of at least 10
      pounds or 5 percent of body weight for those above desirable weight; a reduction in daily
      sodium intake to 1800 mg; a modification of alcohol intake to no more than two drinks per
      day; and an increase in regular, moderate physical activity. The primary endpoint in the
      first phase of the trial was the comparison of mean blood pressure in the Intervention Group
      versus the Monitored Group. In the second phase of the trial, all randomized participants
      were followed for a minimum of five years. The primary endpoints in the second phase were
      the incidence of high blood pressure and/or hypertension.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 30 to 44. Normal high blood pressure of 80-89 mm Hg.
