TITLE:
      Phase II Randomized Open-Label Trial of Atovaquone Plus Pyrimethamine and Atovaquone Plus Sulfadiazine for the Treatment of Acute Toxoplasmic Encephalitis
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the efficacy, safety, and tolerance of atovaquone with either pyrimethamine or
      sulfadiazine in AIDS patients with toxoplasmic encephalitis.

      AIDS patients with toxoplasmic encephalitis who receive the standard therapy combination of
      sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine experience a high frequency of severe toxicity. Atovaquone,
      an antibiotic that has demonstrated efficacy against toxoplasmosis in animal models and in
      preclinical testing has been well tolerated, is now available as a suspension, which is more
      readily absorbed than the tablet form of the drug. The efficacy and safety of atovaquone in
      combination with sulfadiazine or pyrimethamine will be studied.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      AIDS patients with toxoplasmic encephalitis who receive the standard therapy combination of
      sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine experience a high frequency of severe toxicity. Atovaquone,
      an antibiotic that has demonstrated efficacy against toxoplasmosis in animal models and in
      preclinical testing has been well tolerated, is now available as a suspension, which is more
      readily absorbed than the tablet form of the drug. The efficacy and safety of atovaquone in
      combination with sulfadiazine or pyrimethamine will be studied.

      Seventy patients are randomized to receive atovaquone with either pyrimethamine or
      sulfonamides for up to 48 weeks. Additionally, three cohorts of 10 patients each who have a
      history of treatment-limiting toxicity to pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, or both drugs receive
      atovaquone plus the alternate drug or atovaquone plus clarithromycin. All patients receiving
      pyrimethamine also receive leucovorin protection.

      PER AMENDMENT 4/3/96:

      The open treatment groups are: Atovaquone plus pyrimethamine for patients with acute
      toxoplasmic encephalitis who have no treatment limiting toxicity to pyrimethamine, and
      Atovaquone plus clarithromycin for patients with acute toxoplasmic encephalitis who have
      treatment limiting toxicity to both pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine. The following arms
      closed on 12/22/95: Randomization to the atovaquone plus sulfadiazine arm for patients with
      acute toxoplasmic encephalitis who had no treatment limiting toxicity to pyrimethamine or
      sulfonamides, and Atovaquone plus sulfadiazine for patients with acute toxoplasmic
      encephalitis who had treatment limiting toxicity to pyrimethamine. The following arm closed
      on 9/26/95: Atovaquone plus pyrimethamine for patients with acute toxoplasmic encephalitis
      who had treatment limiting toxicity to sulfonamides. NOTE: Any patients enrolled in previous
      versions will continue to be treated with that same drug treatment and followed under their
      previous version guidelines.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Aerosolized pentamidine for PCP prophylaxis.

        PER AMENDMENT 4/3/96:

          -  History of treatment limiting toxicity to pyrimethamine. Patients with a history of
             treatment limiting toxicity to both pyrimethamine and sulfonamides will be assigned
             to receive atovaquone plus clarithromycin.

        Patients must have:

          -  Documented HIV infection or diagnosis of AIDS (except for CD4 count < 200 cells/mm3).

          -  Toxoplasmic encephalitis.

          -  Ability to give informed consent or legal designee who could give consent.

        PER AMENDMENT 4/3/96:

          -  NOTE - A history of treatment limiting toxicity to both pyrimethamine and
             sulfonamides will result in the patient being enrolled in the atovaquone plus
             clarithromycin arm.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Coma.

          -  Opportunistic infection that requires either acute or maintenance treatment with
             disallowed medications.

          -  Any infections or neoplasms of the central nervous system other than Toxoplasma, HIV
             encephalopathy, or syphilis.

          -  Unable to take oral study drugs.

          -  Malabsorption (i.e., three or more episodes of diarrhea per day that has caused >= 10
             percent loss of body weight over the past 4 weeks).

          -  Positive CSF or serum for Cryptococcus antigen or culture (a positive serum antigen
             only is acceptable, provided patient received prior antifungal therapy and is on
             maintenance, and the likelihood of recurrence is low).

          -  Malignancy requiring use of cytotoxic chemotherapy.

          -  Medical or social condition that would adversely affect study participation or
             compliance.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

          -  Primaquine.

          -  Sulfonamides.

          -  Antifolates.

          -  Dapsone.

          -  Clarithromycin (except for patients in the cohort to receive this drug).

          -  Azithromycin.

          -  Clindamycin.

          -  Other macrolides.

          -  Gamma interferon.

          -  Metoclopramide.

          -  G-CSF or GM-CSF.

        Excluded in patients receiving clarithromycin as study drug:

          -  Terfenadine, astemizole, or any other long-acting, non-sedating antihistamines.

        PER AMENDMENT 4/3/96:

          -  Cisapride - may increase GI motility and may increase drug absorption.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of treatment-limiting toxicity to atovaquone.

          -  Receipt of > 96 hours (per amendment) of treatment prior to study entry for the
             current episode of toxoplasmic encephalitis.
