TITLE:
      Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Patch Trial
SUMMARY:
      To test the hypothesis that implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy will
      improve survival in coronary heart disease patients at high risk of death, especially
      arrhythmic death.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Management strategies are urgently needed for the problem of sudden cardiac death, the most
      common single, non-accidental cause of death in adults in North America. Many consider that
      the problem of sudden cardiac death has reached epidemic proportions. Contemporary
      prophylactic management of sudden cardiac death includes identification of high risk
      populations, based on underlying structural heart disease, degree of left ventricular
      dysfunction, and evidence of a ventricular arrhythmia propensity. Populations with the
      highest sudden death cardiac risk, notably those patients resuscitated from spontaneous
      episodes of sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias, have been used as test populations for
      the development of effective prophylactic approaches. However, in such populations, ethical
      considerations have precluded the use of untreated control groups. Furthermore, such
      patients comprise only a small proportion of the total patient population that could benefit
      from an effective prophylactic strategy. The largest 'at-risk' group are those patients with
      coronary artery disease and depressed left ventricular function who have, but have not yet
      expressed, a ventricular tachyarrhythmia propensity. The major advantages of a controlled
      trial of prophylactic therapy in the latter population are evaluation of sudden death
      prophylaxis in the larger 'at-risk' population and the opportunity to do so with an
      untreated control group. The 'window of opportunity' for such comparisons has been closed in
      resuscitated patients for some time and is in danger of closing in the larger population.
      The total absence of controlled efficacy data for ICD use despite 30,000 implanted units of
      this expensive technology argues strongly for the timely acquisition of controlled data in
      the larger population before the therapy is embraced any further.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, non-blind. Patients were randomized during surgery for coronary artery bypass
      graft to receive ICD or not, and followed and censored at 42 months at 35 centers. The
      primary endpoint was all-cause mortality. The trial described morbidity of ICD treatment,
      evaluated the effect of ICD therapy on quality of life, and compared health care costs of
      ICD treatment to those in the control group. Anti-arrhythmic treatment of unsustained
      arrhythmia was prohibited; anti-arrhythmic drug use, when indicated, was documented; and
      aspirin was prescribed unless contraindications existed. Recruitment was extended through
      December 1995 in order to accrue 900 patients, instead of the original 800 projected. As of
      February 1996, 900 patients had been recruited. In April 1997, the DSMB recommended that the
      trial be stopped because there was sufficient evidence to conclude that there was no
      difference between the treatment and control groups. Follow-up was extended for two years
      beyond the original termination date.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, up to age 80, with a left ventricular ejection fraction less than .36 and
        an abnormal signal averaged electrocardiogram.
