TITLE:
      Characteristics of Blood- Brain Barrier Permeability in Neurological Patients
SUMMARY:
      The main goal of the present study is to challenge the hypothesis that blood- brain barrier
      disruption following brain injury increases the risk for long-term disability, development
      of brain dysfunction, epileptic seizures and neuroanatomical alterations.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the most common traumatic events, occurring in
      approximately 200 per 100,000, and is a known risk factor for later development of epileptic
      seizures. This occurs in up to 17% of TBI patients, and accounts for approximately 20% of
      symptomatic epilepsies (Annegers, JF. et al, 1998). Typically, post-traumatic epilepsy (PTE)
      develops or several weeks but even years after the event. PTE is often chronic and poorly
      controlled pharmacologically. Although several factors have been attributed to an increased
      risk of developing PTE (e.g. severity of trauma, type of brain injury, time to the
      appearance of first seizure), the mechanisms underlying it remain unknown. Similar to TBI,
      ischemic injuries, most frequently occurring in the elderly population are the main cause of
      new onset epilepsy in this age group. It is still not known what are the risk factors and
      mechanisms underlying post-ischemic epilepsy.

      Under normal conditions the central nervous system is protected by the operation of the
      blood- brain barrier (BBB). Following brain injury (either traumatic or ischemic) the BBB is
      known to disrupt, leading to focal edema and altered extracellular composition. We have
      recently established methods for quantitative evaluation of the integrity of the BBB using
      magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scans. Using these methods we are able to identify
      BBB disruption in patients suffering from various pathologies (Tomkins, O. et al. 2001;
      Avivi, E. et al. 2004). Such altered permeability may last up to years following the acute
      event and was found to correlate to areas of abnormal neurological function (Korn, A. et al.
      2005)

      In recent work using an animal model, we have shown that following focal disruption of the
      BBB a focus of epileptiform activity is generated within several days. Such pathological
      activity remains for several weeks, long after the BBB has retained its former function
      (Seiffert, E. et al. 2004; Iven, S. et al. 2006). Furthermore, this condition may later lead
      to anatomical alterations as seen by brain MRI scans, as well as in histological sections.
      Such animals further suffer from functional deterioration and neuronal degeneration in the
      disrupted region (Tomkins, O. et al. 2006).

      In this work we will test the hypothesis that BBB disruption following brain injury
      increases the risk for long-term disability, development of brain dysfunction, epileptic
      seizures and neuroanatomical alterations. For that we will combine a prospective and
      retrospective study in patients following cerebral cortical injury (traumatic, hemorrhagic
      or ischemic). Clinical, functional and anatomical measures will be obtained in addition to
      BBB permeability measures.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  One week following:

               -  Traumatic Brain Injury

               -  Cerebro- Vascular Accident

          -  Subsequent brain CT showed cerebral cortex injury.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  A known ailment of the central nervous system.

          -  Use of medications or illicit drugs that significantly affect the central nervous
             system.

          -  tourist or temporary residents not available for follow-up.

          -  For MRI examinations: heart pacemaker, metal implants, or metal shrapnel.
