TITLE:
      Brain Computer Interface (BCI) Based Robotic Rehabilitation for Stroke
SUMMARY:
      The trial aims to test a novel rehabilitation device for subacute stroke hemiplegic upper
      limbs based on state-of-the-art non invasive Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) robotic
      rehabilitation in a clinical setting. The investigators aim to prove the clinical efficacy
      and safety of BCI therapy over traditional rehabilitation methods.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The proposed rehabilitation device is the first neuro-rehabilitation system which combines
      non-invasive BCI and robotic rehabilitation for the paralysed stroke upper extremity within
      6 months of stroke.Spontaneous recovery after stroke takes place over the first 6-12 months
      after stroke. The first 3-6 months are the most crucial periods as this is the period of
      maximal neurological recovery and neuroplasticity. Differential rates of recovery occur for
      various types of impairments post-stroke. In general, motor functions (mobility, walking,
      upper limb function, activities of daily living (ADL)) recover faster than cognitive or
      language impairments which may recover over 12 months. A number of approaches to stroke
      injury rehabilitation have been introduced to facilitate intrinsic recovery or aid adaptive
      compensation for stroke-related impairments. Generally for rehabilitative training to be
      effective, it must be commenced as early as possible after stroke. Current research proves
      that rehabilitation using traditional neuro-facilitation approaches is effective in
      improving neurological and functional recovery and is superior to no treatment or nursing
      care alone. Rehabilitated patients have shorter total hospitalization stays, lower
      complication rates, earlier and higher rates of discharge home than patients who do not
      receive rehabilitation. In addition, rehabilitation involving a multidisciplinary team
      approach led by rehabilitation physician or specialist result in better functional outcomes
      compared to acute general ward-based therapies. In order for rehabilitation to be effective
      in modifying cortical neuroplasticity, it must be targeted at the specific stroke
      impairment, task specific, exercise must be repetitive and intensive, goal directed and
      command the attention of the stroke patient. Some of the components of rehabilitation
      include physical therapy, gait and balance training, aerobic conditioning, functional
      Activities of Daily Living (ADL) training, physical modalities to treat pain, Functional
      Electrical Stimulation (FES) or Neuro-Muscular Electrical Stimulation (NMES). Other methods
      include specific treatments to address complications of rehabilitation such as spasticity,
      ataxia, contractures and bladder or bowel incontinence. Often, one-to-one and highly
      labour-intensive and expensive therapies with close hand-over-hand treatments are required.
      Limitations of current physiotherapy and occupational therapy techniques include the
      following:(1) Difficulties in rehabilitation for the severely paralysed arm and hand which
      are often treated with passive modalities such as NMES, passive ROMs and other modalities.
      (2) Difficulties in achieving intensive rehabilitation and high repetitions in those with
      moderate to severe upper extremity paralysis either due to non participation or pain which
      is commoner in those with severe paralysis. (3)Problems in motivating and sustaining patient
      interest in repetitive exercises.(4)Therapy is often perceived to be boring and due to lack
      of immediate biofeedback. (I) Robot Aided Rehabilitation: MIT (USA) has developed a robot,
      named the MIT-MANUS, to aid therapy of stroke victims. Small clinical trials have reported
      that the robot significantly improved patients' recovery of arm motor movement and function
      with sustained gains several months after cessation of treatment. This system is being
      clinically used as a rehabilitation training tool in over 20 centres world-wide. Advantages
      of robot aided rehabilitation include the ability to document and store motion and force
      parameters, the ability to achieve thousands of repetitions per treatment session (100 times
      more than conventional treatment or FES) without causing tissue injury or pain, high
      intensity with low friction, attention training and increased biofeedback through the
      incorporation of interactive video games, which can simulate trajectories, mazes, ADL tasks
      such as preparing a meal and spatial task simulation such as going shopping. In addition,
      after the initial training period, supervision of the patient by the therapist can be
      reduced due to the sustainability of participation of the patient from the robot or BCI
      based Robotic Rehabilitation. Hence, productivity of the human therapist is increased by the
      robot. The robot thus acts as a high technology aid to the clinician and therapist. The
      system is also portable, giving rise to the possibility of tele-rehabilitation options with
      the performance and progress of the patient being monitored by the institution remotely.
      (II)BCI-based BCI based Robotic Rehabilitation:This non invasive device aims to use a novel
      approach in robotic training, which has not been employed in the therapeutic realm before.In
      the MIT-MANUS and related commercially available systems, there is no direct communication
      between the patient's mind or thinking processes or motor volitional thinking and the
      robotic system. Although some sensors are used to detect the patient's weak movement, it
      never knows when and how the patient wants to move. The robot arm to which the patient is
      tethered or constrained plans the trajectory of movement for the patient and reduces its
      active role as the patient recovers voluntary motion. In most times, the patient can only
      passively follow the predefined program, which may not fully explore the patient's motor
      initiatives and potential or attention processes.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Demographics: 21 to 65 years, within 12 months of first, single clinical stroke
             (ischaemic or haemorrhagic).

          2. Moderate to severe upper extremity (UE) weakness post stroke.

          3. Fugly-Meyer motor score of the upper limb < 40.

          4. Upper limb motor power MRC grade 3 or less /5 in at least 1 arm region.

          5. Able to give own consent and understand simple instructions and learn through
             practice.

          6. Resting brain states determined by FMRI criteria

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Recurrent stroke.

          2. Previous brain surgery.

          3. Spasticity of Modified Ashworth scale > 2.

          4. Fixed contracture of any upper limb joint

          5. Ataxia, dystonia or tremor of the involved upper limb or previous cervical myelopathy

          6. Upper limb pain or painful joints in upper limb.

          7. Severe cognitive impairment (Abbreviated Mental Test <7/10), or severe aphasia which
             may affect ability to participate in training.

          8. . History of seizures in the past 12 months.

          9. Severe left neglect
