TITLE:
      Laparoscopic Occlusion of Uterine Vessels Compared to Uterine Fibroid Embolization for Treatment of Uterine Fibroids
SUMMARY:
      Women with symptomatic uterine fibroids are treated either by Uterine Fibroid Embolization
      (UFE) or laparoscopic occlusion. The study hypothesis is that laparoscopic occlusion of
      uterine vessels and UFE have equal effect on bleeding symptoms. Menstrual bleeding reduction
      six months after treatment is the main endpoint. Secondary endpoints include participants
      assessment of symptom relief, and volume reduction of fibroids measured by MRI. We will also
      investigate possible differences in postoperative course, symptom reduction, complication,
      and recurrence. Patients are controlled with regular intervals up to five years after
      treatment.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Uterine fibroid embolization (UFE)has become an alternative to hysterectomy for women with
      symptoms of uterine fibroids.Follow up studies of this new method have reported relief of
      menstrual bleeding by 85-90 % of the patients six to twelve months after treatment.Other
      studies have suggested laparoscopic bilateral occlusion of uterine arteries as an equal
      effective alternative, but to our knowledge there is no randomized studies published.

      Patients recruitment : Women with symptoms of uterine fibroids referred to the clinic,who
      express a desire to avoid hysterectomy.

      Study hypothesis: Laparoscopic occlusion of uterine vessels and UFE have equal effect on
      bleeding symptoms.

      Gynecological examination, ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are
      performed preoperatively and after 1,3 and 6 months. Clinical follow up is planned after
      1,3,6,12,24,36 and 60 months.A validated bleeding chard, Pictorial Blood Assessment
      Chart(PBAC)is filled in by the participants during the last menstruation period before
      treatment and before each control. A standardized questionnaire to assess the bleeding
      amount,pressure symptoms, pain, adverse events, other complains and patients satisfaction is
      also used.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Menorrhagia and/or bulk symptoms associated with uterine fibroids

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Malignancy

          -  Current or planned pregnancy

          -  Small submucous fibroids suitable for hysteroscopic resection

          -  Postmenopausal women

          -  Suspected or known adenomyosis

          -  Uterus size exceeding the umbilical level

          -  Contraindications against laparoscopic surgery
