TITLE:
      Treatment for First-Episode Schizophrenia
SUMMARY:
      This 3-year study will determine if the antipsychotic medications olanzapine (Zyprexa®) and
      risperidone (Risperdal®) can help patients with first-episode schizophrenia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The goal of the study is to prevent morbidity in first-episode schizophrenia using
      second-generation antipsychotic drugs: olanzapine, risperidone.

      Long-term studies of first-episode schizophrenia patients have clearly indicated excellent
      initial responsiveness of positive psychotic symptoms to treatment with conventional
      antipsychotic medications. However, in the years immediately following this initial good
      response, morbidity increases. Relapses, often multiple ones, are the rule and are usually
      precipitated by medication noncompliance. There is some evidence that the second-generation
      antipsychotic drugs may have superior efficacy in terms of these outcome domains. However,
      these newer agents have been studied primarily in chronic and/or treatment-resistant patient
      samples and there are virtually no long-term studies or studies comparing the new drugs with
      one another.

      First episode patients are randomly assigned to treatment with olanzapine or risperidone for
      3 years. Outcome measures for the initial episode include psychopathology (positive,
      negative, and affective symptoms), side effects, neurocognition (executive function, memory,
      and attention), social and occupational function and service utilization. The effects on
      long-term course are measured in terms of frequency and timing of relapses, level of
      recovery from subsequent episodes and prospectively assessed course of psychopathology,
      neurocognitive function, social/vocational function, and service utilization.

      For information on a related study, please follow this link:

      http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00320671
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  First episode schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder or schizoaffective disorder

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Prior treatment with antipsychotic medications.
