TITLE:
      Beta-Blocker Evaluation in Survival Trial (BEST)
SUMMARY:
      To determine if addition of a beta-blocker to standard therapy in Class III and Class IV
      heart failure patients reduced total mortality.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Controlled and uncontrolled studies suggested that beta-blockade improves ventricular
      function in congestive heart failure. Several trials suggested that beta-blockers may also
      reduce mortality. In the Beta-Blocker Heart Attack Trial, patients with a history of heart
      failure had less cardiac and sudden-death mortality than those who did not. Patients with a
      low ejection fraction in the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial who were treated with
      beta-blockade also had a reduction in mortality. The Metoprolol in Dilated Cardiomyopathy
      trial randomized patients with dilated cardiomyopathies to treatment with metoprolol or
      placebo. There was a trend toward reduction in a morbidity and mortality endpoint in
      patients treated with metoprolol, but this was due entirely to a reduction in the need for
      cardiac transplantation. Thus, despite a reasonable theoretical basis and suggestive
      clinical studies, the concept that beta-blockers reduced mortality in congestive heart
      failure patients was unproved.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, multicenter. Patients were assigned to standard therapy plus the
      addition of a beta-blocker (bucindolol) versus a placebo. The primary endpoint was total
      mortality. A radionuclide ventriculogram was performed within 60 days of randomization.
      History, physical examination, clinical laboratory studies, chest x-ray, electrocardiogram,
      and plasma norepinephrine levels were obtained within 14 days of randomization. Patients
      were stratified by hospital, congestive heart failure etiology, ejection fraction, and
      gender, and were assigned to a treatment group by an adaptive balancing scheme ("biased
      coin" randomization). Patients were randomized to either placebo plus standard congestive
      heart failure treatment or to the beta-blocker plus standard congestive heart failure
      treatment and followed for a minimum of 18 months. The over three year recruitment period
      began in May 1995 at the first 35 sites. An additional 55 sites began recruitment on August
      14, 1995. Recruitment ended in December, 1998 with the enrollment of 2,708 patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 18 and over. Patients had compensated congestive heart failure due to
        idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy or coronary disease with ejection fraction less than or
        equal to 0.35, were in the New York Heart Association functional class III or IV, and were
        taking an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, digitalis, and if needed, a diuretic.
        Patients with a specific indication for, or contraindication to, beta-blockade were
        excluded.
