TITLE:
      Estrogen and Graft Atherosclerosis Research Trial (EAGER)
SUMMARY:
      To determine if postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy in women following coronary
      bypass surgery would reduce the occurrence of graft occlusion and delay the development of
      graft atherosclerosis.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Coronary atherosclerosis is a major cause of death in women in the United States. Although
      coronary artery bypass surgery decreases symptomatic and clinical evidence of ischemia, it
      does not alter the underlying process. Patients may present several years later with
      recurrent symptoms that may be a result of occlusion of saphenous vein grafts, development
      of atherosclerotic disease in vein grafts, or progression of underlying disease. Any
      intervention that can reduce the rate of progression of coronary atherosclerosis following
      bypass surgery would provide significant benefit for women following bypass surgery and
      possibly for other women with atherosclerotic disease. Observational studies suggest that
      postmenopausal estrogen replacement therapy is associated with a reduction in cardiac
      morbidity.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The study was a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Subjects were randomized to
      conjugated estrogen with daily medroxyprogesterone or placebo within two weeks of bypass
      surgery. Graft occlusion and development of vein graft atherosclerosis were measured by
      comparing quantitative coronary angiographic and vascular ultrasonic assessment of disease
      severity and extent performed at six months and three and a half years after randomization.
      The primary outcome variables included the occurrence of graft occlusion at six months and
      the change in severity and extent of atherosclerosis in the saphenous vein grafts over three
      years. The trial determined the influence of hormone replacement therapy on the primary
      outcome variables.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Postmenopausal women who had undergone coronary artery bypass graft.
