TITLE:
      Lung Health Study (LHS) I and III
SUMMARY:
      In the Lung Health Study I, to determine the effects of Special Care, compared to Usual
      Care, on rate of decline in pulmonary function in a group of cigarette smokers identified as
      having mild abnormalities in pulmonary function.

      In the Lung Health Study III, to determine the long-term effects of smoking cessation and
      continued smoking, on cardiopulmonary morbidity, mortality, and the rate of decline in the
      one second forced expiratory volume (FEV1) in men and women with early chronic obstructive
      lung disease who have been followed prospectively for 12 to 15 years.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of mortality and morbidity in
      the United States, affecting nearly 10 million persons. COPD accounts for 60,000 deaths
      yearly and ranks as the fourth leading cause of death. If current trends continue, it may
      become the nation's fourth or even third leading cause of death by the year 2000.

      Epidemiological studies consistently indicated that smoking was the over-whelming risk
      factor for accelerated decline in pulmonary function and subsequent development of COPD.
      Furthermore, evidence from several studies indicated that the rate of decline in pulmonary
      function approached a more normal rate of decline upon cessation of cigarette smoking.

      Another presumed risk factor for accelerated decline in pulmonary function was the presence
      of hyperreactive airways, although it was not clear whether the mere presence of
      hyperreactive airways contributed to the accelerated decline, or whether the decline
      resulted from the reaction of the airways to various irritants over a long period of time.
      It is possible that if the hyperreactive airway was kept non-reactive by pharmacological
      means over a period of years, the expected abnormal decline might be lessened. This effect
      might be enhanced by the cessation of cigarette smoking.

      Although the evidence was strong that smoking and hyperreactive airways were risk factors
      for COPD, it had not been demonstrated whether removal of risk factors at a stage when mild
      dysfunction had already occurred would effectively modify the course of COPD.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Lung Health Study I

      Randomized and controlled. Cigarette smokers with evidence of airways obstruction underwent
      baseline testing that included spirometric responses to isoproterenol and methacholine and
      were then randomly assigned to one of three groups: a no intervention or usual care group; a
      group receiving a smoking cessation program and bronchodilator therapy; a group receiving a
      smoking cessation program and a placebo bronchodilator. The placebo/bronchodilator therapy
      was double-blind. The smoking intervention consisted of an intensive 12-session smoking
      cessation program combining behavior modification and use of nicotine gum, with a continuing
      five-year maintenance program to minimize relapse. The bronchodilator consisted of
      ipratropium bromide prescribed three times daily, two puffs per time, from a metered-dose
      inhaler. All groups were followed yearly for five years. The primary endpoint was the rate
      of change of FEV1. Respiratory morbidity was a secondary endpoint. Recruitment began in
      November 1986 and was completed in January 1989. The clinical phase of the trial ended in
      April 1994. The study continues under contract N01-HR-46002 through September, 2004 for data
      analysis and dissemination of research results.

      Lung Health Study III

      Beginning in fiscal year 1998, all surviving participants of LHS I are invited to
      participate in the long-term followup. The study will determine, using an intent-to-treat
      analysis, whether the LHS I smoking intervention significantly reduces the incidence of
      clinically important respiratory and cardiovascular disease over a 12- to 15-year period
      following study enrollment. The study will also estimate the magnitude of the effects of
      FEV1 and FVC on the risks of cardiovascular and respiratory morbidity and mortality, after
      controlling for smoking history. Studies will be conducted on the role of other factors such
      as gender, airways reactivity, weight gain, and co-morbidities in determining the rate of
      decline in pulmonary function and the risks of cardiovascular and respiratory morbidity and
      mortality. A determination will also be made as to whether the improvement in lung function
      and reduction in respiratory symptoms associated with smoking cessation result in improved
      health-related quality of life (HRQL) and less depression over an extended follow-up period.
      The LHS III, an investigator initiated long-term follow-up study, is not an NIH- defined
      clinical trial.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women who were cigarette smokers and between the ages of 35 and 60.
