TITLE:
      Familial Atherosclerosis Treatment Study
SUMMARY:
      To compare the effects of two intensive lipid-lowering regimens with conventional therapy on
      coronary atherosclerosis as assessed by arteriography.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      For several decades, clinical trials have addressed the question of whether treatment of
      hyperlipidemia reduces the risk of cardiovascular events. Substantial evidence supports the
      idea that cardiovascular benefits are related to the degree of reduction in low-density
      lipoprotein cholesterol level and perhaps to the degree of increase in the high-density
      lipoprotein cholesterol level. In these trials, changes in lipid levels have usually been
      small and the overall clinical benefits have been limited. The appearance in the 1980s of
      more effective treatments for hyperlipidemia, new arteriographic methods for assessing
      atherosclerosis, and new insights into atherogenesis permitted an objective investigation
      into whether the progression of atherosclerosis was retarded or reversed by lipid-lowering
      agents.

      The clinical trial was supported by a subproject within a program project grant.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled. Baseline arteriograms were performed and
      fasting lipid samples drawn before heparinization. Patients were stratified for age below 45
      years, cigarette smoking within the previous month, and lipid patterns including familial
      hypercholesterolemia and triglyceride levels. Patients were given dietary counseling and
      randomly assigned to one of three treatments: lovastatin (20 mg twice a day) and colestipol
      (10 g three times a day); niacin (1 g four times a day) and colestipol (10 g three times a
      day): or conventional therapy with placebo (or colestipol if the LDL cholesterol level was
      elevated). The primary endpoint was a measure of change in the severity of disease in the
      proximal coronary arteries as measured by quantitative arteriography.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Men

          -  Age 62 or younger

          -  elevated apolipoprotein B levels

          -  coronary atherosclerosis

          -  family history of coronary heart disease.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  diabetes

          -  severe hypertension

          -  cancer

          -  liver disease

          -  thyroid disease

          -  kidney disease
