TITLE:
      Characteristics Predictive of Success and Complications in the Use of Suture-Mediated Closure of Femoral Venous Access
SUMMARY:
      Suture-mediated closure devices are effective and safe for achieving rapid hemostasis in
      femoral venous access site and reducing the incidence of complications associated with
      traditional closure methods. Furthermore, there are predictive factors(such as sheath size,
      obesity, procedure duration, and anticoagulation status)that we can use to assess the
      procedure's likelihood of success in various patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a retrospective cohort study of consecutive patients receiving suture-mediated
      closure of the femoral vein following catheterization. All patients undergoing cardiac or
      arterial catheterization by the Interventional Cardiovascular Medicine Service at The
      Brigham and Women's hospital from 3/1/02 to the onset of the study and who had femoral
      venous access during that time were considered for closure of the venous site; however, the
      decision to use the closure device was left to the discretion of the physician.
      Contraindications to using the closure device include a groin hematoma that had developed
      during the procedure and/or difficult access due to extensive scar tissue from surgery or
      multiple prior vascular accesses.

      All in-hospital endpoints have been collected in the pre-existing Catheterization Laboratory
      Database. Patient's data will be extracted from this database as indicated in the procedure
      below. Each patient will be reviewed for clinical follow-up and the presence of adverse
      events including but not limited to hematoma, thrombosis, blood loss, vascular imaging, the
      need for additional procedures, and re-admissions within 30 days of closure. If necessary,
      further data will be collected via a phone interview with the patients. Univariate and
      multivariate analysis will be performed to determine the factors that predict inadequate or
      incomplete closure or the development of complications mentioned in the section above. A
      predictive model based on the identified risk factor will be developed and tested
      prospectively in the next phase of this ongoing investigation.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All consented pts. over the age of 18 who received sutured mediated femoral vein
             following catheterization

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Pt.s who are unable to give consent.

          -  Pts. whose participation in research is contraindicated for medical reasons are
             excluded.
