TITLE:
      Oral Contraceptive Ethinyl Estradiol Dose Effect on Postpartum Depression and Sexual Functioning Scales
SUMMARY:
      This is a prospective, randomized, controlled cohort study. This study will look at the
      effect of Ethinyl Estradiol 35mcg/Norethindrone 1mg and Ethinyl Estradiol 20
      mcg/Norethindrone 1mg on postpartum depressive symptoms and sexual function scores when
      compared to a control group using no hormonal contraception. Depressive symptoms and sexual
      function will be measured using the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), Arizona
      Sexual Experiences Scale (ASEX), and Brief Index of Sexual Functioning for Women (BISF-W).
      Participants will begin taking the medication at Week 3 postpartum, and these outcomes will
      be measured at baseline (0-1 day postpartum), Week 3, and Week 6-7. The investigators
      hypothesize that there will be an ethinyl estradiol dose related response in EPDS, ASEX, and
      BISF-W scores at Week 6-7, which would indicate a decrease in depressive symptoms and
      increase in sexual function in both of the oral contraceptive groups.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  18-45 year old women who desire contraception postpartum for at least 6 weeks.

          -  18-45 year old women who choose not to use oral contraceptive medication postpartum
             for at least 6 weeks for the control group.

        Exclusion Criteria (Medication groups):

          -  Breastfeeding (although this may limit participant enrollment, combined oral
             contraceptives are contraindicated in this population).

          -  Delivery by cesarean section.

          -  Previous history of depression, mood disorders, or psychiatric disorders.

          -  Any condition (history or presence of) which contraindicates the use of combination
             OCs, including:

          -  Thrombophlebitis or thromboembolic disorders, known or suspected clotting disorders,
             deep vein thrombosis, thrombogenic valvulopathies or rhythm disorders.

          -  Pulmonary Embolism.

          -  Cerebrovascular or coronary artery disease or myocardial infarction.

          -  Diabetes mellitus.

          -  Migraine headaches with focal, neurological symptoms.

          -  Chronic renal disease.

          -  Uncontrolled or untreated hypertension.

          -  Cholestatic jaundice.

          -  Known or suspected carcinoma of the breast, endometrial carcinoma, or known or
             suspected estrogen-dependent neoplasia.

          -  Impaired liver function or disease, hepatic adenomas or carcinomas.

          -  Known hypersensitivity to estrogens and/or progestins.

          -  History of thyroid disorders.

          -  Recent alcohol or drug use.

          -  Smoking and age ≥35 or smokers who will become 35 years of age during the study.

          -  Known history of noncompliance with taking medication.

        Exclusion Criteria (Control group):

          -  Previous history of depression, mood disorders, or psychiatric disorders.

          -  Recent alcohol or drug use.
