TITLE:
      Behavioral Treatment of Fibromyalgia
SUMMARY:
      Fibromyalgia (FM) is one of the most common rheumatic diseases (conditions or disorders that
      cause pain or stiffness in the joints, muscles, or bones). It affects 6 million Americans
      and up to 20 percent of patients seen by doctors who specialize in treating rheumatic
      diseases. This study will evaluate the effects of two of the most promising nondrug
      treatments for FM: coping skills training and physical exercise training. We will randomly
      assign each of 180 patients diagnosed with FM to one of four groups: coping skills training
      (CST), physical exercise training alone, CST plus physical exercise training, or a waiting
      list (nontreatment group). We will look at the separate and combined effects of CST and
      physical exercise training and evaluate how changes in aerobic fitness, self-effectiveness
      (a person's belief in his or her ability to reach a goal, such as managing one's own
      disease), and negative pain-related thoughts relate to improvements in pain and disability.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Fibromyalgia (FM) is characterized by diffuse musculoskeletal pain, discrete tender points
      at typical soft-tissue sites, fatigue, stiffness, and sleep problems. Of these symptoms,
      pain is often the primary concern of FM patients and their physicians. Traditional medical
      approaches to managing FM have limitations (side effects) and have not been effective in
      managing pain. Given these limitations, treatments that involve nonpharmacologic
      interventions may represent a valuable addition to patient care. This study will evaluate
      the effects of two of the most promising nonpharmacologic interventions for FM: coping
      skills training (CST) for pain management and physical exercise training.

      The study is designed to test the hypothesis that an intervention that combines CST and
      physical exercise training will be more effective than CST or exercise alone. In this study,
      we will randomly assign each of 180 patients diagnosed with FM to one of four conditions:
      CST alone, physical exercise training alone, CST plus physical exercise training, or a
      waiting list control. We will evaluate study participants on four occasions: pre-treatment,
      post-treatment, 3-month followup, and 6-month followup.

      The study will look at the separate and combined effects of CST and physical exercise
      training and evaluate how changes in aerobic fitness, self-effectiveness, and negative
      pain-related thoughts relate to improvements in pain and disability. Physicians could use
      this information in matching FM patients to treatment interventions. In addition, our
      findings may have implications for treatment selection for a broad range of patients
      suffering from persistent pain.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Complaints of pain persisting for 6 months

          -  Meet diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia (American College of Rheumatology criteria)

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  A significant adverse medical condition that would expose the individual to increased
             risk of an adverse experience during the course of the trial (e.g. a recent (<6
             months) myocardial infarction)

          -  An abnormal cardiac response to exercise

          -  Other significant rheumatic disease

          -  Receiving or applying for disability or compensation benefits because of fibromyalgia
