TITLE:
      Response To Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy In Heart Failure: Role Of Arterial Stiffness
SUMMARY:
      To determine if arterial stiffness as measured by non-invasive pulse wave velocity can
      predict the response to resynchronization therapy in heart failure.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The patients receiving CRT are medically refractory, symptomatic, NYHA class III or IV
      disease and QRS duration of 130 m sec or greater, and a left ventricular ejection fraction
      of 30 percent or less.

      The pulse wave velocity between carotid and femoral (PWVcf) will be recorded in each subject
      at base line (before and after CRT), at one month (after AV delay optimization) and again at
      6 months after CRT. The arterial pulse wave is recorded at a proximal artery, such as the
      carotid artery, and as well as at a distal artery, such as the femoral artery. The
      superficial location of the carotid and femoral arteries means that their pulse waveforms
      are readily measured noninvasively using the M Hz Doppler probe, and between these two sites
      the pulse wave has to travel through most of the aorta. The time delay between the arrival
      of a predefined part of the pulse wave, such as the foot, at these 2 points is obtained by
      gating to the peak of the R-wave of the ECG. The distance traveled by the pulse wave is
      measured over the body surface and PWV is then calculated as distance/time (m/s).

      Clinical evidence of response: Either one or more of the following: 1) Improvement in NYHA
      functional classification, 2) Improvement in 6 minute walking distance. 3) Change in
      functional class, exercise tolerance while the heart is getting smaller on CXR. 4)
      Stabilization of patient CHF even without subjective improvement over 6 months (remaining
      class III rather than progressive to class IV). Imaging evidence of response: 1) Increase in
      left ventricular ejection fraction. 2) Reduction of mitral regurgitation. 3) Reduction of LV
      volume signifying reverse remodeling.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  The patients receiving CRT are medically refractory, symptomatic, NYHA class III or
             IV disease and QRS duration of 130 m sec or greater, and a left ventricular ejection
             fraction of 30 percent or less.

          -  All individuals are carefully selected after appropriate clinical evaluation as
             determined by the treating physicians to exclude possible reversible causes of heart
             failure.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with permanent atrial fibrillation and non-palpable carotid and/or femoral
             pulses will be excluded due to technical limitations of the procedure used for the
             measurement of arterial stiffness.
