TITLE:
      Human Surfactant Treatment of Respiratory Distress Syndrome Bicenter Trial
SUMMARY:
      To determine if surfactant administration at birth in infants at high risk for respiratory
      distress syndrome (RDS) modified the clinical course of the syndrome.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Respiratory distress syndrome affects more than 40,000 infants annually in the United
      States. The overall mortality rate exceeds 20 percent and in infants weighing less than 1500
      grams at birth, RDS is responsible for or contributes to the 30-70 percent mortality,
      depending on birthweight. The present customary treatment of RDS with intermittent mandatory
      ventilation is accompanied by sequelae such as extra-alveolar air leaks, intraventricular
      hemorrhage, and bronchopulmonary dysplasia in approximately 50 percent of survivors.

      The respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn is a disorder in which the pulmonary
      surfactant is deficient. It has not been possible to completely replace natural components
      of surfactant with synthetic components and achieve a mixture which functions
      physiologically like pulmonary surfactant. Therefore, studies of replacement therapy for
      surfactant deficiency have used complete natural surfactants or derivatives of natural
      surfactant which contain the defined components of surfactant. The surfactant used in the
      clinical trial was derived from human amniotic fluid.

      Two basic different strategies for surfactant treatment of respiratory distress syndrome
      have emerged: prophylactic, or preventilatory, treatment at or shortly after birth versus
      rescue treatment after the initiation of mechanical ventilation in instances of clinically
      confirmed respiratory distress syndrome. Although treatment at birth has the theoretic
      advantage of delivering surfactant more uniformly to the airways before mechanical
      ventilation, it has the disadvantages of delaying physiologic stabilization after birth and
      resulting in unnecessary treatment, at considerable cost, of 20 percent to 40 percent of
      infants born at or less than 30 weeks of gestation. Rescue therapy permits early physiologic
      stabilization and confirmation of respiratory distress syndrome, but with the theoretic
      disadvantages of early lung injury from mechanical ventilation in the surfactant-deficient
      lung and less uniform surfactant distribution. Previous comparative trials have been biased
      by incomplete study enrollment and inclusion of infants in preventilation treatment groups
      without evidence of surfactant deficiency or immaturity. In addition, outcomes have varied
      in placebo-treated infants.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, placebo-controlled. Singleton infants were assigned to receive a placebo (air),
      prophylactic surfactant treatment given intratracheally, or rescue surfactant treatment.
      Multiple birth infants received either prophylactic or rescue treatment. Of 282 potentially
      eligible infants, 246 received treatments at birth and 200 had respiratory distress syndrome
      and received the full course of surfactant therapy. Preterm infants randomly assigned to
      receive prophylactic treatment received surfactant soon after birth; those assigned to
      receive rescue surfactant had instillation at a mean age of 220 minutes if the
      lecithin-sphingomyelin ratio was _ 2.0 and no phosphatidylglycerol was detected in either
      amniotic fluid or initial airway aspirate, oxygen requirements were a fraction of inspired
      oxygen of > 0.5 and mean airway pressure was _ 7 cm H20 from 2 to 12 hours after birth. Up
      to four treatment doses were permitted within 48 hours; approximately 60 percent of
      surfactant-treated infants required two or more doses. Endpoints included the mortality rate
      at 28 days of age, the incidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia at 28 days after birth and at
      38 weeks to adjust for differences in gestational age, the incidence of pulmonary air leaks,
      and the severity of respiratory distress syndrome as assessed by requirement for
      supplemental oxygen and mechanical ventilation.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Boy and girl preterm infants 24-29 weeks of gestational age and 500-1400 grams
        birthweight.
