TITLE:
      Osteopathic Treatment of Low Back Pain
SUMMARY:
      Eighty percent of Canadians experience low back pain (LBP) at some point in their life
      (Waddell, 1987), with a point prevalence of up to 30 percent (O'Sullivan, 2005; Waddell,
      1987). Low back pain has severe economic ramifications. Most incidents of low back pain
      occur during the prime working years of life, with an estimated cost to the economy at
      $14,744 Canadian dollars per person per year (Health Canada, 1998). Indirect costs in the
      form of long-term disability were highest for disorders of arthritis and chronic back pain
      (Health Canada, 1998). It has been estimated that 12 percent of patients will experience
      disability within one year after their first episode of low back pain (Banner, 2006).
      Evidence based diagnosis and treatment is important for desirable outcomes.

      The investigators predict that there will be changes in A) trunk muscle electromyographic
      patterns and in temporo-spatial gait patterns following osteopathic treatment.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Research has outlined trunk muscle activation patterns in patients with LBP are different
      from those who do not suffer from low back pain (Clarke-Davidson and Hubley-Kozey, 2005;
      Hodges, 1996 and 1997; McGill, 2001 and 2002). Osteopathic research has documented the
      effects of osteopathic manipulative therapy (OMT) on EMG activity in patients with low back
      pain (Beckman, Harrington, Dostert, et al., 1991; Ellestad, Nagle, Boesler, et al.,1988;
      Krpan, Harrington, Beckman, 1992; Steiner, Park, Guzels, 1991) however these studies were
      limited in design and methodology.

      In a controlled trial which measured levels of cellular enzymes to monitor tissue damage
      during OMT, blood serum enzyme levels did not change as a result of manipulation. More
      important, EMG levels decreased. OMT did not damage tissue but changed motor neuron activity
      (Rowane, Horner, Warner, et al., 1989). Beckman, et al., (1991) observed a reduction in EMG
      activity following OMT in patients with low back pain and found increased skin blood flow as
      measured by laser doppler flow meter. Steiner et al. (1991), reveal reduction to muscle
      spasm as measured by EMG in patients with low back pain following OMT. A further study
      (Ellestad, et al., 1988) noted decreased EMG activity during motion in patients with chronic
      low back pain. Thus there is preliminary work providing support for reduced EMG activity
      following OMT within low back pain treatment groups. However there is a need for further
      research in this area.

      We also want to determine the role of manual therapy (osteopathy) in the management of gait
      dysfunction in this patient population. Patients with LBP present with reduced gait speed,
      poor thoraco-pelvic coordination and increased erector spinae activity (Lamoth et al. 2002
      and 2006), altered weight bearing (Ellen Lee et al., 2007) and reduced single leg stance
      balance in static conditions (Louto et al., 1998).

      Reduced thoraco-pelvic coordination leads to muscular stabilizing effects, altered
      kinematics, trunk rigidity, and reduced walking velocity (Lamoth et al., 2002). Specific
      impairments of body structure and function can reduce gait speed in older adults (Kerrigan,
      Todd, Della Cruce, 1998). Osteopathic intervention targets movement impairments of body
      structure and should change gait speed in patients with chronic LBP. Mal-alignment
      contributes to pathology in the pelvis and lumbar spine which can lead to degenerative
      changes, instability and pain (Aebi, 2005; Gurney, 2002; Steinburg, Luger, Arbel, et al.,
      2003). The focus of osteopathy is to restore mobility and alignment throughout the whole
      kinetic chain (Kutchera and Kutchera, 1991; Seffinger, 2007).

      Improvement in gait speed and joint motion is shown after mobilization exercises to the
      ankle and hip in the elderly (Christiansen, 2003). A kinetic relationship links the ankle
      and pelvis (Gurney, 2002; Khamis & Yizhar, 2007; Pinto, Souza, Tede, et al., 2008).
      Cephalo-caudal (pelvis affects ankle), caudal-cephalo (ankle affects pelvis) and
      ipsilateral-contralateral (one leg affects the other via the pelvis) alignment and kinematic
      relationships occur when lower extremity joints are maintained in altered positions (Pinto,
      et al., 2008). Can movement dysfunction secondary to impaired mobility and mal-alignment
      contribute to pain and antalgic gait?
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  between the age of 19 and 55 years old,

          -  able to walk without assistance and /or assistive devices at least 4.7 meters.

          -  have adequate hearing acuity to detect verbal instructions.

          -  have adequate visual acuity to walk safely in usual ambient lighting without holding
             onto objects.

          -  be able to speak and comprehend English,

          -  have sufficient cognitive ability to follow instructions, and to provide informed
             consent, as defined by a Mini Mental Status Examination score of greater than 23 out
             of 30, performed by the research coordinator.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  have had neurological signs and symptoms, or complications such as tumor or
             infection.

          -  are active in a claim pertaining to a motor vehicle accident or work injury or under
             any litigation for their pain.

          -  have had previous osteopathic treatment in the last year.

          -  had more than one abdominal surgery, or spinal fracture, or structural deformity such
             as scoliosis or spondylolithesis (Hubley-Kozey, 2002)

          -  have severe cardiopulmonary disease as determined by a health questionnaire with
             symptoms such as shortness of breath or chest pain on mild exertion or at rest,

          -  history of severe neurological disorder that impairs balance and mobility eg stroke,
             Parkinson's disease, peripheral neuropathy

          -  have pain that leads to severe discomfort with minimal movement,

          -  have significant musculoskeletal impairment e.g. arthritis that leads to severe
             discomfort with walking that could lead to an abnormal gait,

          -  have cognitive compromise impairing ability to care for oneself, and ability to
             provide informed consent,

          -  have dizziness while standing,

          -  have a history of falls in previous month that might make it unsafe to participate in
             a gait study
