TITLE:
      DEPITAC : Short Screening Scale for Psychotraumatic Disorders After Motor Vehicle Accident
SUMMARY:
      Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a serious and often chronic response to
      overwhelmingly stressful events as Road Traffic Accident. Moreover PTSD is associated with
      increased rates of medical morbidity, poor health-related quality of life, and functional
      impairment. PTSD is prevalent in primary care settings after road traffic accident, where
      approximately 25% of patients meet diagnostic criteria for the disorder. Despite the
      development of a number of efficacious behavioral and pharmacological treatments, only a
      minority of patients with PTSD receive mental health services. PTSD is frequently
      underrecognized and untreated in Emergency Department and Surgical Unit.

      Then, early diagnosis and prevention of PTSD might help to identify patients with PTSD high
      risk and lead them to benefit of personalized cares. Nevertheless it is not possible
      (neither useful) to provide psychological cares for each road traffic accident victim.

      This is the reason why we think that nurses can help to screen patients who need treatment
      for PTSD Hypothesis : Recognition of specific clinical or biological signs occurring during
      road traffic accident victim hospitalization in surgical unit could allow beginning specific
      treatment using consultation liaison psychiatry.

      Early treatment could allow decreasing incidence of psychotraumatic disorders, increasing
      surgical functional efficacy and improve convalescence programs. The use of a specific
      questionnaire could help to screen this disorder.

      We have created the DEPITAC scale : a short screening questionnaire with 10 items.

      This study will be evaluated DEPITAC's 10-item screen for posttraumatic stress disorder
      (PTSD) for use in surgical or emergency department.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      We include 300 road traffic accident victims hospitalized in surgical department (less than
      2 weeks). Patients are hospitalized in 5 different hospitals (3 in Lille, 1 in Douai, 1 in
      Paris). Patients will be evaluated by a short screening questionnaire (DEPITAC's 10 item
      screen). Patients will be evaluated by phone with a experimented psychologist (Minimal
      International Neuropsychiatric Interview DSM IV, PTSD Check List symptoms) at 6 weeks, 6
      months and 1 year after the accident.

      Purposes :

        -  To evaluate DEPITAC's 10-item screen for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) for use
           in surgical or emergency department.

        -  To measure prognosis value of DEPITAC's 10 item screen on acute PTSD (PTSD Check List
           symptoms (PCLs) 6th week) and late PTSD (PTSD Check List symptoms (PCLs) 6 months and 1
           year) or other psychiatric disorder (anxiety, depression or addictive disorder)
           (Minimal International Neuropsychiatric Interview MINI DSM IV at 6 months and 1 year).

        -  To compare DEPITAC to Peritraumatic Distress Inventory (PDI) given a the same time.

        -  To calculate DEPITAC's total score and correlate to the onset of a PTSD at 6 week, 6
           months and 1 year.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Road traffic accident victims hospitalized in surgical department less than 2 weeks

          -  Can be called by phone

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patient with a coma for more than 15 minutes

          -  Patient with a crania traumatism and with loss of consciousness over 15 minutes

          -  Homeless
