TITLE:
      Evaluation of Galantamine in the Treatment of Alzheimer's Disease
SUMMARY:
      Galantamine is an experimental drug being evaluated in the United States for the treatment
      of Alzheimer's disease. Results from previous clinical trials suggest that galantamine may
      improve cognitive performance in individuals with Alzheimer's disease. It is not a cure for
      Alzheimer's disease. Nerve cells in the brain responsible for memory and cognitive function
      communicate using a chemical called acetylcholine. Research has shown that deterioration of
      cells that produce acetylcholine in the brain affects thought processes. Galantamine is
      thought to work in two ways to increase the amount of acetylcholine available in the brain.
      It inhibits an enzyme that breaks down acetylcholine and it also stimulates the nicotinic
      receptors in the brain to release more acetylcholine.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      After a 1-month single-blind run in phase, 910 subjects will be titrated, over a period of
      up to 8 weeks, to target doses of either: 0 (placebo); 24 mg/day galantamine; 16 mg/day
      galantamine; or 8 mg/day galantamine, in a 2:2:2:1 randomization ratio. Double-blind
      treatment will continue for a total of 5 months. The change from baseline in ADAS-cog and
      CIVIC-plus scores at Month 5 will be the primary efficacy endpoints. Tolerability will be
      evaluated based on adverse event reports, laboratory values, ECG, and vital signs with
      particular focus on the adverse event rates in the slower titration schedule for 24 mg/day.
      Efficacy of 24 mg/day and 16 mg/day galantamine will be compared with that of placebo.
      Information on the dose response relationship of galantamine will be evaluated.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Probable Alzheimer's disease

          -  Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 10-22 and ADAS greater than or equal to 18

          -  Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive portion (ADAS-cog-11) score of at
             least 18

          -  Opportunity for Activities of Daily Living

          -  Caregiver

          -  Subjects who live with or have regular daily visits from a responsible caregiver
             (visit frequency: preferably daily but at least 5 days/week). This includes a friend
             or relative or paid personnel. The caregiver should be capable of assisting with the
             subject's medication, prepared to attend with the subject for assessments, and
             willing to provide information about the subject.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Conditions that could confound diagnosis

          -  Neurodegenerative disorders

          -  Acute cerebral trauma

          -  Psychiatric disease

          -  More than one infarct on CT/MRI scans

          -  History of alcohol or drug abuse

          -  Contradictions for a cholinominetic agent: seizures; ulcers; pulmonary conditions
             (including severe asthma); unstable angina; Afib; bradycardia less than 50; and AV
             block.
