TITLE:
      Women's Health Study (WHS): A Randomized Trial of Low-dose Aspirin and Vitamin E in the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effects of low-dose aspirin and vitamin E in
      primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer in apparently healthy women.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Various doses of aspirin have been shown to be effective in preventing thrombosis or
      vascular occlusion in several clinical conditions. Short-term studies have documented the
      efficacy of aspirin in preventing occlusion of saphenous vein bypass grants, preventing
      myocardial infarction in patients with unstable angina, preventing transient ischemic
      attacks and stroke in men with cerebral vascular disease, preventing occlusion of injured
      coronary arteries following transluminal angioplasty and aiding in reducing myocardial
      infarction and total mortality in patients receiving fibrinolytic therapy. Additionally,
      aspirin has been effective in the secondary prevention of myocardial infarction in subjects
      with known coronary artery disease. The results of the Physicians' Health Study, a
      large-scale primary prevention trial of aspirin in male physicians, have shown a decrease in
      myocardial infarction, a non-significant increase in cerebral vascular events, and no
      difference in overall mortality. However, few studies have addressed the efficacy of aspirin
      in vascular diseases in women, and it is possible that the risk to benefit ratio may be
      different in women. Specifically, there have been no large primary prevention trials in
      women, who are at risk of coronary heart disease, especially after menopause.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The Women's Health Study (WHS) is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial using
      a 2x2 factorial design. The WHS is sponsored by both NHBLI (HL080467) and NCI (CA047988).
      Approximately 1.75 million female health professionals were contacted by mail to determine
      if they were suitable for inclusion in the study. A three-month run-in phase was performed
      to screen out those with poor compliance. Randomization, which began in February 1993 and
      ended in January 1996, was stratified on five-year age groups. A total of 39,876
      participants were randomly assigned to either Vitamin E (600 IU every other day) or placebo;
      and to aspirin (100 mg every other day) or placebo. IN the 2x2 factorial design, women were
      randomly assigned to active aspirin and placebo vitamin E (n=9,968), placebo aspirin and
      active vitamin E (n=9,971), active aspirin and active vitamin E (n=9,966), or placebo
      aspirin and placebo vitamin E (n=9,971). A description of the characteristics of women in
      these 4 groups is provided in J Women's Health Gend Based Med 2000;9:19-27. In the main
      analyses, all women on active aspirin (n=19,934) were compared to women on placebo aspirin
      (n=19,942); and all women on active vitamin E (n=19,937) were compared to women on placebo
      aspirin (n=19,939).

      As part of the initial trial, pre-randomization blood samples from 28,345 participants were
      frozen and stored for genetic analysis which has been supported by non-federal sources.

      The primary endpoint is the reduction of the risk of all important vascular events (a
      combined endpoint of nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, and total
      cardiovascular death) and a decrease in the incidence of total malignant neoplasms of
      epithelial cell origin. Secondary endpoints are the individual components of the combined
      endpoints. Compliance is measured by replies to a questionnaire sent out every year. The
      trial was completed in 2004 and results were published in 2005 (N Engl J Med
      2005;352:1293-304; JAMA 2005;294:47-55; JAMA 2005;294:56-65).

      Currently, women are being followed on an observational basis.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Healthy women

          -  No previous history of cardiovascular disease or cancer

          -  No contraindications to aspirin or vitamin E
