TITLE:
      Chest Pressure for Intubated Peds Patients
SUMMARY:
      We previously showed that a gentle chest pressure technique could be used on children over a
      year old to generate around 20% of the volume of air inhaled or exhaled in a single normal
      breath (also known as tidal volume). This showed that a non-invasive method could be used to
      provide a temporary means of artificial breathing, meaning that invasive procedures, such as
      putting in a breathing tube, could be avoided. What our results did not tell us, however, is
      how much oxygen can get to peripheral tissues (e.g., arms, legs) with this method. In this
      study, we want to compare two groups of children. All children will have a breathing tube;
      one group will have gentle chest pressure performed on them to see if oxygen saturations can
      be maintained above 90%. The other group will receive no chest pressure. We will see how
      long it takes for oxygen levels in both groups to drop to 90%, at which point, the patient
      will be ventilated mechanically.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND Airway management is different in the pediatric population compared to adults
      mainly due to the differences in respiratory physiology and anatomy. The oxygen consumption
      is about three times as high in children than in adults resulting in a higher impact on
      oxygen delivery and reserve should there be a problem with ventilation in children. During
      inspiration, the vertical dimension of the chest cavity is increased and the rib margins are
      lifted and moved out, causing an increase in the transverse diameter of the thorax. This
      generates a negative pressure in the intrapleural space between the lungs and the chest wall
      resulting in lung inflation. The rib cages of young children are very pliable. One of the
      theoretical ways to improve the efficiency of lung inflation in small children with such
      compliant rib cage is to apply pressure on the chest. The intrathoracic pressure increases
      above atmospheric pressure and air preferentially flows out of the lungs according to the
      pressure gradient. When the pressure on the chest is released and the thorax recoils
      passively ("springs open"), a negative intrathoracic pressure is generated. This effectively
      "sucks" air into the lungs along the pressure gradient. Although age-related pliability
      differences may be present, we do not expect this to be a significant factor in using the
      chest pressure technique successfully.

      We previously demonstrated that application of gentle pressure on the right chest of
      pediatric patients generated 20% of the tidal volume achieved with mechanical ventilation,
      regardless of whether the patient was intubated or not. Chest pressure was monitored using a
      force transducer and did not exceed the patient's body weight. Indeed, the pressure used was
      considerably less than what would be administered during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
      There was little variation across age ranges; for each age group, we observed a difference
      of less than 1 mL/kg compared to the overall mean tidal volume. Our study also showed that
      the gentle chest pressure technique was well-tolerated by pediatric patients of any age
      (neonate to adolescent), and no adverse events were encountered, supporting this technique
      as a very low-risk maneuver.

      While these results are encouraging, the study did not provide detailed information on how
      much peripheral oxygenation (SpO2) is achieved with the gentle chest pressure technique. An
      editorial that accompanied the published study supports further investigation of the
      technique, including the extent to which it provides ventilation and its ability to provide
      adequate oxygenation. In this study, we wish to perform the technique on pediatric patients
      to determine if it can be used to maintain SpO2 for a significant length of time. For safety
      purposes, all trials will be done on patients whose tracheae have been intubated.

      OBJECTIVE To determine if a gentle chest pressure technique can be used to maintain SpO2
      over 90% significantly longer than allowing SpO2 to desaturate spontaneously.

      HYPOTHESIS Gentle chest pressure can maintain SpO2 over 90% for significantly longer than if
      tissues are allowed to desaturate spontaneously.

      METHODS After obtaining ethics approval, informed consent with or without assent whenever is
      appropriate (usually above the age of 6 years) will be obtained on the day ward. Consent
      will be obtained by a research assistant not involved with the clinical care of the patient.
      The demographic details of the patients, such as age, weight, height, ASA and any medical
      conditions will be recorded. The patient will be taken into the operating room, and routine
      monitoring will be applied. After induction of a standard general anesthesia where the
      technique is at the discretion of each individual anesthesiologist responsible for the case,
      the patient's trachea will be intubated. The patient will be ventilated mechanically for two
      minutes to achieve 100% peripheral oxygen saturation.

      During this time, the patient will be randomly allocated to one of two groups - intervention
      and control - by a member of the study team. Instructions in sealed envelopes will indicate
      whether the chest pressure technique will be used or not. For patients in the intervention
      group, the anesthesiologist will apply gentle pressure (not exceeding the patient's own
      weight) vertically down on the patient's right chest. In the previous study, we calibrated
      pressure using a force transducer; since then, the Stollery pediatric anesthesia staff has
      been employing the technique in regular practice and are well experienced with the amount of
      force needed to generate adequate tidal volume. Since a pre-defined distance to depress the
      chest (e.g., 1 or 2 cm) is difficult to use for a wide range of patients weights
      (approximately 9-67 kg range in the previous study), in this study, the anesthesiologist
      will apply pressure to the point where resistance is encountered and then release. Upon
      release of pressure, the anesthesiologist will wait for one second. In our experience, the
      time taken to apply downward pressure and allow for chest recoil lasts approximately four
      seconds which, with the one second pause following pressure release, creates a total time of
      5 seconds for the entire maneuver. As such, the maneuver can be used to achieve 12 breaths
      per minute. Oxygen saturation will be monitored and recorded continuously. The time taken
      for SpO2 levels to fall to 90% will be recorded, at which point, the anesthesiologist will
      restart mechanical ventilation. If SpO2 values fall below 90% at any time while the chest
      pressure technique is being performed, the patient can be ventilated mechanically
      immediately because they are already intubated.

      Patients randomized to the control group will receive the same care as the intervention
      group except that no chest pressure technique will be performed. Following mechanical
      ventilation to 100% SpO2, surgery will proceed as normal with no additional intervention
      (i.e., gentle chest pressure) by the anesthesiologist. Peripheral oxygen saturations will be
      monitored during this time, and once the level reaches 90%, the time will be recorded, and
      the anesthesiologist will restart mechanical ventilation.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All pediatric patients between one and 18 year of age

          -  Requirement for insertion of an endotracheal tube

          -  American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class I to III

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Failure to obtain parental consent or patient assent when appropriate (in general,
             children over 6 years of age)

          -  ASA IV

          -  Patients with any cardiac pathology

          -  Patients with any respiratory pathology

          -  Patients with any form of chest deformity, for example, pectus excavatum, pectus
             carinatum, scoliosis

          -  Patients who had previous cardiac or thoracic surgery
