TITLE:
      Growth Hormone Releasing Hormone (GHRH) Treatment for Age-Related Sleep Disturbances
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of giving growth hormone releasing
      hormone (GHRH) to treat sleep disorders in older men and in older women who are on estrogen
      replacement therapy (ERT).

      Many older men and women complain of sleep disturbances. GHRH has been used successfully to
      treat sleep disorders in young men and may help older men and women.

      40 healthy older men and 40 healthy older women on ERT will receive either GHRH or an
      inactive placebo.

      An individual may be eligible for this study if he/she is a healthy older man or woman with
      sleep disturbances, and is on estrogen replacement therapy (women).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To examine the effects of synthetic growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) versus placebo
      on the sleep quality, 24-hour secretory pattern of growth hormone (GH), and insulin-like
      growth factor 1 (IGF-1) concentrations of 40 healthy older men and 40 healthy older women on
      estrogen replacement therapy (ERT). To determine if augmenting the GH-IGF-1 axis can improve
      the objective sleep quality of the older population. To determine if treatment-related
      changes in sleep quality are correlated with changes in GH and/or IGF-1 concentrations.

      Nearly 40% of the geriatric population complain of poor sleep quality, a complaint that is
      validated by objective findings. The physiological consequences of age-impaired sleep are
      poorly understood, but may include damped circadian rhythms and impaired anabolic hormone
      status. Poor sleep may also account for the disproportionate prescription of sedative
      hypnotics to older adults which may exacerbate sleep apnea, lead to daytime carryover
      effects such as sedation, falls, fractures, cognitive impairment, and anterograde amnesia,
      and has been associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The recent NIH Consensus
      Conference on the Treatment of Sleep Disorders in Older People concluded that nonsedative
      interventions to improve sleep quality in the elderly population are obviously needed. One
      such intervention may be stimulation of the GH-IGF-1 axis by GHRH administration. Clinical
      evidence indicates sleep quality can be affected by extremes of GH status and several recent
      studies report acute GHRH administration improves sleep quality in young men. We have
      recently demonstrated that measures of sleep quality correlate with basal IGF-1
      concentrations in healthy older men and ERT women.

      40 healthy older men and 40 healthy older women on ERT receive either GHRH or placebo.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients must have:

        Age-related sleep impairment.

        Required:

        Estrogen replacement therapy for women.
