TITLE:
      Retrospective Study Evaluating The Current Utilization Of Desvenlafaxine Succinate Sustained-Release (Pristiq) Among Psychiatrists And Primary Care Physicians In The Treatment Of Patients With Major Depressive Disorder
SUMMARY:
      The goal of this observational study is to learn about how Pristiq is currently being used
      in general practice and how psychiatrists and primary care physicians currently perceive
      Pristiq in terms of efficacy, tolerability, and adherence compared to other treatments for
      major depressive disorder (MDD).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      It is retrospective patient chart study among psychiatrists and primary care physicians
      (PCPs) treating patients suffering from major depressive disorder (MDD). Physicians will be
      asked general medical questions in order to quantify their prescribing behavior and their
      perception of treatment performance. A retrospective patient chart review will then be
      performed and patient data will be collected to document patient characteristics and actual
      treatment outcomes. Upon qualification, specific instructions for chart review will be
      provided. Once the identified charts are pulled, the physicians are instructed to continue
      with the on-line survey. In total, there will be approximately 450 psychiatrists and 450
      primary care physicians participating in this trial.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients must be adult, diagnosed with major depressive disorder and treated with
             pharmacotherapy.

          -  Physicians must be either a psychiatrist or a primary care physician, a prescriber of
             Pristiq, have at least 3 charts representing the 4 identified patient types, have
             been in clinical practice between 4 and 35 years, primarily office based (50%+), not
             participated in a research study relating to antidepressants or antidepressant
             therapy within the past month, not a consultant or have a professional relationship
             with a pharmaceutical company other than for clinical trials or speaking engagements,
             and not be employed by of affiliated with an advertising agency, market research
             company, or pharmaceutical company.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who have not been treated for depression.
