TITLE:
      Infant Heart Surgery: Central Nervous System Sequelae of Circulatory Arrest
SUMMARY:
      To compare the influence of two surgical anesthetic techniques, hypothermia with circulatory
      arrest or hypothermia with low-flow bypass perfusion, on neurologic functioning in infants
      undergoing heart surgery.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The pediatric medical community has long been concerned about the increased incidence of
      cerebral dysfunction among newborns with severe cyanotic congenital heart disease. There has
      been concern about a great number of potential predisposing factors including the effects of
      hypoxemia and acidosis, trauma during cardiac catheterization, and the duration of prolonged
      decreased arterial oxygen saturation. Many infants undoubtedly undergo significant brain
      damage prior to surgery, but may be subject to further insult in the peri-operative period.
      The proposed trial studied circulatory arrest versus low-flow bypass methods of surgical
      support in a homogeneous group of patients who were managed in identical fashion in all
      other aspects of their treatment. Major factors, such as the influence of cardiac
      catheterization and presurgical status were specifically incorporated into the primary
      statistical analysis. This was important in order to identify significant predisposing
      causes of brain injury beyond the surgical techniques being compared, and to increase the
      power of the comparison.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, partially blinded. Infants were assigned to deep hypothermia and either
      circulatory arrest or low-flow bypass support during arterial switch surgical repair of
      transposition of the great arteries. Randomization was stratified by diagnosis (with or
      without septal defect) and by specific surgeon of three, thus yielding six strata within
      each treatment group. Randomization was also blocked to minimize imbalances in treatment
      assignment between strata. The study was partially blinded, in that outcome data were
      obtained by investigators who were unaware of management, surgical care, and intensive care
      were standardized. Hemodynamic assessment was made early in the post-operative period. The
      outcomes of primary interest (magnetic resonance imaging, neurologic examination, and
      psychometric testing) were reviewed at the one-year evaluation, to maximize relevance to the
      long-term prognosis. Pre-operative and seven-to-ten day post-operative neurologic
      examination was also carried out. Developmental status at one year was measured by the
      Bayley developmental scales and the Fagan test of infant intelligence. Brain function was
      assessed by neurologic examination at one year. The recruitment period extended from April
      1988 to February 1992.

      The trial was extended through December 1997 to allow four years of follow-up. The follow-up
      allowed the assessment of a primary outcome variable in the neurologic domain and a primary
      outcome variable in the developmental domain. The primary outcome variable of the neurologic
      examination resulted in an ordered classification of three categories of normal, minor, and
      major dysfunction, such as apraxia or cerebral palsy. Development was assessed using
      standardized measures of cognition, behavior, language, attention, and motor skills. The
      primary outome variable for the developmental evaluation was the intelligence quotient on
      the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI-R). Secondary outcome
      variables included measurements of behavior and performance in specific domains of speech
      and language, visual motor integration, attention, motor function, and temperament.

      Beginning in January 1998, the study was extended for an additional four years through
      December 2001 to compare the effects of the two intraoperative methods with respect to
      developmental and neurologic status at eight years of age. Developmental status was assessed
      by the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test (primary outcome) and by the presence of
      learning disabilities and performance in specific neuropsychologic domains (secondary
      outcomes). Neurologic status was determined by neurologic exam (primary outcome) and by
      specific types of dysfunction such as motor problems. The study also compared the academic
      and intellectual performance of the cohort at age eight years to population norms and used
      the data to identify correlates of the children's eight year outcomes, as well as their
      development between ages one and eight.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Boy and girl infants, up to three months of age, with transposition of the great arteries
        with or without septal defect.
