TITLE:
      A Comparison of mNT-BBAVF and BCAVF in Hemodialysis Patients
SUMMARY:
      A well-functioning vascular access is essential for effective hemodialysis. The native
      arteriovenous fistula (AVF) is the preferred vascular access because of the lower thrombosis
      and infection risks compared to either synthetic arteriovenous grafts or central venous
      catheters. Brachiocephalic arteriovenous fistula (BCAVF) and transposed brachiobasilic
      arteriovenous fistula (T-BBAVF) are recommended when there is either a primary failure or no
      suitable vessels for the forearm fistula. However, BCAVF is frequently cannulated at the
      antecubital fossa, the risks of stenosis and thrombosis are high, which will compromise
      proper BCAVF function and survival. T-BBAVF is not only technically challenging, but also
      associates with severe arm swelling and pain. Thus, the investigators introduced a novel
      modified Non-transposed brachiobasilic arteriovenous fistula (mNT-BBAVF) for long-term
      hemodialysis patients. To confirm its efficacy, a prospective clinical study would be
      carried out.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The study aims to compare the outcomes of a novel modified Non-transposed brachiobasilic
      arteriovenous fistula (mNT-BBAVF) and the standard brachiocephalic arteriovenous fistula
      (BCAVF) for long-term hemodialysis patients. Briefly, in mNT-BBAVF, a side-to-side
      anastomosis between the brachial artery and non-transposed proximal basilic vein is
      disposed, followed by the ligation of the vein above anastomosis. All the perforating in the
      surgical field should be ligated. All patients will be followed up for 12 months after
      surgeries. The outcomes includes: hemodynamic parameters (vessels's diameters, blood flow
      velocities and blood volumes) detected by ultrasound in 12 months, Complications in 1-month
      and 12-month, primary patency and secondary patency (cumulative patency).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Age from 18 to 75 years;

          -  Radial artery diameter <2.0 mm or cephalic vein diameter in the forearm <2.5 mm;

          -  Brachial artery diameter ≥ 2 mm

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Stenosis or thrombosis present in the draining vein;

          -  A history of peripheral ischemia in upper extremities;

          -  Active local or systemic infections;

          -  Inability to consent for the procedure;

          -  Patients with previous dysfunctional forearm fistula.
