TITLE:
      Phase II Study of STA-2 in Patients With Chronic Stable Angina
SUMMARY:
      The objectives of this study are to evaluate the efficacy, pharmacological activities and
      safety of STA-2 in the treatment of chronic stable angina.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of STA-2 in the management
      of chronic stable angina. The secondary objectives of this study were to evaluate the safety
      and pharmacological activities of STA-2 in the management of chronic stable angina. This was
      a multi-center, double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study of STA-2
      in the management of chronic stable angina. The study period for each patient was
      approximately 7 weeks, during which the patient undergone one-week screening and washout
      period, followed by 6 weeks of treatment. Each patient was required to make a total of 5
      visits. Primary Efficacy Endpoint: Change in total exercise time.

      After washout, patients who met the inclusion and exclusion criteria were randomly assigned
      either to the treatment or control group. The respective regimens were:

      Treatment group:

      STA-2 250 mg capsule, each containing 100 mg green tea polyphenols, 2 capsules ter in die
      (t.i.d.=three times daily) for 6 weeks, to be administered in a non-fasting state.

      Control group:

      Placebo 250 mg capsule, 2 capsules t.i.d. (three times daily) for 6 weeks, to be
      administered in a non-fasting state.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria:

          1. Male or female aged > 20;

          2. Patients who had effort-induced angina which was relieved by rest or nitroglycerin,
             or who had catheterization-documented coronary artery disease or previous myocardial
             infarction ≥ 3 months before screening;

          3. Patients who manifested positive ETT (exercise tolerance testing) (defined as
             ST-segment depression ≥ 1 mm compared with at rest, with or without limiting angina)
             at screening (Day -7);

          4. Patients who manifested positive ETT (exercise tolerance testing) (defined as
             ST-segment depression ≥ 1 mm compared with at rest, with or without limiting angina)
             on the day of enrollment (Day 0). ETT performance between Day -7 and Day 0 were
             required not differ by >20% in total exercise time;

          5. Female patient who was in the post-menopausal stage or of childbearing potential who:

               -  used adequate contraception since last menstruation and no plan for conception
                  during the study;

               -  was non-lactating;

               -  had negative pregnancy test (urine) within 14 days prior to the study;

          6. Able to provide written informed consent.

        Exclusion criteria:

          1. Patients with pre-excitation, conduction abnormalities, pacemaker rhythm, unstable
             angina or myocardial infarction within the preceding 3 months;

          2. Patients with heart failure (New York Heart Association class III or IV), uncorrected
             valvular or congenital heart disease, patients who needed digoxin, isosorbide
             mononitrate, nitroglycerin sustained release preparation, theophylline, class I
             antiarrhythmic agents, digitalis, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors, as judged by the
             investigator;

          3. Patients with any EKG abnormalities preventing the interpretation of ischemia
             (complete left bundle branch block);

          4. Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) requiring bronchodilators;

          5. Patients with hepatic failure (defined as aspartate transaminase (AST) and/or alanine
             transaminase (ALT) > 3X the upper limit of normal values), and/or renal failure
             (defined as serum creatinine > 3 mg/dL);

          6. Patients with severe gastrointestinal illness as judged by the investigator;

          7. Patient with any conditions that interfered the performance of exercise tolerance
             test as judged by investigator (e.g., knee/ankle arthropathy, Parkinsonism, stroke).
