TITLE:
      Enhancing Recovery in Coronary Heart Disease (ENRICHD) Patients
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the effect of psychosocial intervention on mortality and reinfarction in
      coronary heart disease patients at high psychosocial risk.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      As medical treatments for coronary heart disease have become more sophisticated, they have
      also become more costly. Evidence concerning the effects of medical and rehabilitative
      therapies on post-myocardial infarction patients' quality of life, including return to work
      and to normal levels of functioning, has been mixed. At the same time. recent data suggest
      that psychosocial factors, such as social isolation and depression, are important predictors
      of morbidity and mortality in coronary heart disease patients. These studies suggest that
      interventions which provide psychological support to myocardial infarction patients may
      enhance both the psychosocial and physical recovery of these patients. To the extent that
      supportive interventions can be shown to impact favorably on survival and health-related
      quality of life in myocardial infarction patients, the human and financial costs associated
      with coronary heart disease can be reduced. The initiative originated in the Working Group
      on Psychosocial Interventions which met in June 1992.

      The initiative was given concept clearance by the October 1993 National Heart, Lung, and
      Blood Advisory Council. The Request for Proposals was released in September 1994.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The study design compared a psychosocial intervention group, in which patients were provided
      with social and psychological treatment designed to decrease social isolation and
      depression, with a standard medical care group. The combined endpoint was death and
      reinfarction, measured for up to 4.5 years following hospital discharge. Secondary endpoints
      included assessment of health quality of life (HQL).

      The protocol was approved in May 1996. Recruitment began in October 1996 and ended on
      October 31, 1999 with 2,481 patients enrolled.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women coronary heart disease/myocardial infarction patients, hospitalized for
        enzyme-documented MI and who are depressed and/or have low social support. Patients must
        be enrolled with 28 days of the index MI.
