TITLE:
      Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI)
SUMMARY:
      To assess the relative long-term safety and efficacy of percutaneous transluminal coronary
      angioplasty (PTCA) and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery in patients with
      multivessel disease and severe angina or ischemia who required revascularization and had
      coronary anatomy suitable for either procedure.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The management of patients with symptomatic coronary heart disease has evolved considerably
      in the past twenty years with the application of invasive techniques in an ever increasing
      proportion of patients.

      With refinements in CABG surgery over the past twenty years, operative myocardial
      revascularization is feasible in most patients with myocardial ischemia. Several
      multicenter, randomized trials have been reported, comparing medical with surgical
      management in patients with coronary artery disease. Based on the three largest trials and
      an extensive observational literature, a consensus appears to be emerging regarding the
      circumstances under which medical or surgical management appears to be the method of choice.

      It is clear that CABG relieves angina in the vast majority of patients with severe symptoms.
      It is also apparent that this procedure can be performed with very low risk by experienced
      operative teams. Thus, CABG is indicated for patients with suitable coronary anatomy who
      have severe angina refractory to medical therapy and those with significant obstruction of
      left main coronary artery.

      The timing of operative intervention in patients with less severe angina is a point of some
      dispute at present. It is, however, apparent that certain categories of patients have
      improved survival after elective bypass surgery. These categories include patients with left
      main coronary stenosis, triple vessel disease with modestly impaired ventricular function,
      and possibly other clinically defined high risk patients. The remaining patients with mild,
      symptomatic coronary disease, it would appear, can afford to defer operative intervention
      until such time as symptoms worsen and require palliation.

      Long-term information is available on some patients who had CABG in the early 1970s. By ten
      years substantial progression of disease is present in both the native coronary circulation
      and in the bypass grafts. Investigators have reported that as many as two-thirds of vein
      bypass grafts are closed or narrowed and intrinsic coronary disease has progressed in as
      many as one-half of non-bypassed vessels at 10 years following surgery. The timing of
      surgery in less severely symptomatic patients, strategies to decrease disease progression in
      grafted vessels and native circulation, and renewed interest in the use of the internal
      mammary artery to revascularize the heart are very active research issues at present.

      PTCA was first applied to human coronary disease in 1977. There have been major advances in
      catheter design, balloon construction, and identification of both high and low risk patients
      for this procedure. Experienced angioplasty teams can now successfully dilate severe lesions
      in more than 90 percent of patients attempted. This success rate can be achieved with less
      than one percent operative mortality and less than five percent myocardial infarction and/or
      emergent coronary artery bypass graft surgery. However, as many as one-third of successfully
      dilated patients will experience the return of angina within the following six months to one
      year, reflecting restenosis of the dilated lesion. Most of these individuals can
      successfully undergo a second dilatation.

      Thus, two quite effective interventions are available for patients with symptomatic coronary
      artery disease sufficient to require palliation by some mechanical means. Each has strengths
      and weaknesses. PTCA is relatively noninvasive, requires initially fewer hospital days and
      less intensive care, and preserves veins and mediastinum for CABG should it be required
      later. However, not all lesions present in a patient with multivessel disease can be
      dilated. There is substantial risk of restenosis and recurrence of symptoms, and a small but
      finite risk of having to undergo immediate CABG surgery following a failed PTCA,
      considerably increasing the risk of the surgery. CABG surgery results in more complete
      revascularization and relatively low short-term graft closure, and it can be done with an
      acute risk approximately equal to PTCA. However, it is apparent that surgical intervention
      does not change a patient's propensity to atherosclerosis; in ten years two-thirds of grafts
      have been compromised with atherosclerosis or thrombosis and there has been progression of
      atherosclerosis in the native, non-bypassed coronary circulation in roughly one-half of the
      patients. Second operations are considerably more difficult technically, carry a higher
      operative risk, and result in less dramatic relief of symptoms. There is a substantial
      population of patients with severe, symptomatic, multivessel coronary disease in whom it is
      unclear whether PTCA or CABG should be applied first.

      In September 1984, the Workshop on Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery recommended
      consideration of a clinical trial involving surgery and angioplasty. An NHLBI Task Force,
      established in January 1985, recommended that a clinical trial in multivessel coronary
      artery disease be considered by the Institute. The Cardiology Advisory Committee unanimously
      recommended the design and execution of a trial. In September 1985, the National Heart,
      Lung, and Blood Advisory Council discussed this clinical trial initiative and recommended it
      enthusiastically.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Patients who received coronary arteriography at the clinical units because of severe angina
      or unstable angina, with or without antecedent myocardial infarction, were asked to
      participate in the study. A total of 2,013 eligible patients who refused randomization and
      422 who were ineligible on the basis of angiographic findings were asked to participate in
      the follow-up registry. The remaining patients were then randomized, 914 to CABG and 915 to
      PTCA, between August 1988 and August 1991. Baseline data included the clinical profile,
      12-lead electrocardiogram, and information on coronary angiographic features, angina and
      functional status, medications, risk factors, and quality of life. Initial revascularization
      was performed within two weeks after randomization. Angiograms (baseline and sub study
      directed at 1 year and 5 years), and ECG's are interpreted by respective core laboratories.
      Scheduled multiple stages of PTCA were counted as a single procedure. New interventional
      devices, such as stents, were not used during the initial revascularization. Follow-up
      visits were conducted at the clinics at weeks four through fourteen after study entry and at
      one, three, and five years, with telephone contacts at six months and two and four years.
      The importance of risk factor modification was emphasized throughout the study to the
      patients and their primary physicians. The primary end point was mortality from all causes.

      The trial has been extended through November 2002 to complete the minimum ten-year followup
      on all BARI patients, determine the relative efficacy of PTCA versus CABG in subgroups of
      women, Blacks, diabetics, and elderly, and assess the public health impact of BARI. In the
      followup, all currently enrolled patients will have annual telephone interviews. At ten
      years, the electrocardiogram will be obtained on all patients and blood lipid levels will be
      performed on randomized patients only. All hospitalizations that occurred since the last
      contact will be identified on the annual telephone contact. Angina will be assessed for the
      preceding six weeks. At each patient contact, patients will be instructed in behavior
      modification in the areas of smoking cessation, exercise, and diet. Angiographic studies
      will also be conducted as part of the ten-year follow-up. The four centers which
      participated in the first phase of these BARI activities will again conduct the angiograms.
      Patients will consist of the established cohort drawn from the randomized participants who
      completed one and five year angiograms.

      A substudy of BARI, Study of Economics and Quality of Life (SEQOL), was initially funded by
      the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to assess the impact of a specific revascularization on
      quality of life, functional and economic (hospital and physician charges) outcomes in
      patients randomized to BARI, and to examine factors other than treatments that affect these
      outcomes. Beginning in July 1997, support for SEQOL was assumed by the NHLBI under grant
      R01HL58324. The grant, ending in June 2002, extends the follow-up of the randomized SEQOL
      substudy cohort (752 subjects surviving as of May 1, 1996) to ten years to study the
      long-term determinants of cost and quality of life and to develop a model to project the
      impact of technologic changes on outcomes and cost of CABG and PTCA.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Multivessel coronary artery disease requiring revascularization and suitable for either
        PTCA or CABG.
