TITLE:
      Self-Management Therapy for Youth With Schizophrenia
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to test the effectiveness of a family-centered,
      community-based, self-management intervention (Self-Management Therapy) for adolescents with
      schizophrenia. The study will test the intervention's effectiveness in improving the
      adolescents' behavior, thinking, mood, and use of substances such as drugs and alcohol. The
      study also will look at the effects of the patient on the family.

      The intervention involves training in recognizing symptoms of schizophrenia and in stress
      management, problem-solving, and social skills. Parents and siblings are included to gain
      knowledge and skills to support the adolescents.

      The Self-Management Therapy intervention is administered in small multiple-family groups in
      12 sessions over 7-1/2 months. The effects of the intervention on the patient and his/her
      family are assessed prior to treatment, after 6 sessions, after 12 sessions, and in a
      follow-up visit 6 months after completion of sessions.

      A child may be eligible for this study if he/she:

      Is 15 to 19 years old and has been diagnosed with schizophrenia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To test the effectiveness of a family-centered, community-based, self-management
      intervention (Self-Management Therapy) for adolescents with schizophrenia. The primary aim
      is to test its effectiveness in improving the adolescents' level of functioning in role
      performance, thinking/cognitive processing, behavior towards others, mood, and use of
      substances. The second aim is to assess the impact of the intervention on family
      functioning. The third aim is to describe the relationships among the process variables of
      the intervention.

      Nakagawa-Kogan's self-management nursing model, Kanfer's self-regulation theory, and
      Liberman's theory of stress and vulnerability provide the theoretical basis for the
      self-management intervention developed specifically for a population with deficits in
      cognitive processing. The intervention involves training in symptom awareness, stress
      management skills, problem-solving, and social skills. Parents and siblings are included to
      gain knowledge and skills to support the adolescents.

      The adolescent's level of functioning is assessed using the Child and Adolescent Functional
      Assessment Scale, the Birchwood Early Signs & Symptoms Scale for schizophrenia, and the
      DISA. Family Functioning is assessed by computing a Composite Family Functioning Index using
      weighted scores from the FACES II, Family Apgar, Family Empowerment, and Family Social
      Support scales. One parent is designated by the family to be the family respondent on the
      scales. The adolescents are referred to the study by mental health professionals. The
      intervention is administered in small multiple-family groups in 12 sessions over 7-1/2
      months. Data are collected at 4 points in time: at baseline, after 6 intensive sessions,
      after 6 monthly reinforcement sessions, and 6 months post-intervention. ANCOVA is used to
      test the study hypotheses. Multivariate relationships are examined among the process
      variables of the intervention.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients must have:

        Schizophrenia as diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria when screened by a mental health
        professional using the K-SADS and the DISA.
