TITLE:
      The InChianti Follow-Up Study
SUMMARY:
      Background:

      - Older persons are often referred to physicians because of mobility difficulties that grow
      worse as they age. To better understand the reasons for mobility difficulties in older
      persons, researchers conducted a population-based study of individuals living in the Chianti
      geographic area of Tuscany, Italy. Researchers are now interested in conducting a follow-up
      study on the original participants to assess the effects of aging on their mobility.

      Objectives:

      - To conduct a follow-up study on the participants in the mobility study of older persons in
      the Greve in Chianti and Bagno a Ripoli areas near Florence, Italy.

      Eligibility:

      - Original participants in the InChianti Mobility Study.

      Design:

        -  The InChianti Follow-up Study will repeat most elements of the baseline evaluation from
           the original study. Participants will be seen on the 3-year anniversary of their
           baseline study assessment.

        -  Participants will have a home interview with questions about their physical and mental
           health, family history, daily activities, and living conditions related to their
           continued mobility.

        -  Participants will provide blood and urine samples, and will have tests of heart and
           motor nerve function and imaging studies of bones and the circulatory system.

        -  Participants will also have a functional evaluation of their motor skills, including
           walking tests, range of motion tests, and grip strength.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      In the past decade epidemiologic and clinical studies have described the prevalence and
      incidence of disability and have elucidated demographic characteristics, health behaviors,
      diseases, and physiologic impairments that are associated with increased risk of developing
      disability in old age. Mobility disability has emerged as a critical aspect of functioning.
      Mobility, defined as the ability to move independently from one point to another, is a
      critical part of maintaining independence and an essential attribute of quality of life. In
      those age 85 years and older, nearly 60 percent of women and 40 percent of men have
      difficulty walking two to three blocks. Older people who are mobile are more likely to
      remain in the community, have lower rates of subsequent morbidity and mortality, and have
      higher quality of life. Recent work in biomechanics, clinical geriatrics, epidemiology, and
      clinical trials has helped to improve our understanding of the decline in walking ability in
      old age and the influence of multiple intrinsic and extrinsic factors. However, a great deal
      is still not understood about how older persons progressively lose the ability to ambulate.
      The InChianti Study has the potential to make major new advances in our knowledge of
      progressive decline in ambulation in older persons.

      A great deal of information is available from the baseline evaluation in this study and the
      crosssectional analyses that can be done with these data will be very valuable. There are,
      however, limitations in what we can learn from cross-sectional data. The baseline data
      revealed many relationships between factors that were studied and disability, but there may
      be circularity in these relationships that cannot be sorted out if we only have
      cross-sectional data available. For example, abnormalities in certain biomarkers may be a
      cause of disability or may be caused by disability. Only by doing longitudinal analyses that
      begin with non-disabled persons can the temporal sequence be determined. Cross-sectional
      analyses only permit the study of factors that are currently related to disability while
      longitudinal analyses allow for the identification of subclinical markers of risk that
      predict future disability onset. There is therefore much to be gained by performing a
      follow-up evaluation of the cohort to obtain longitudinal data.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      -  INCLUSION CRITERIA:

        Age 65 years and older

        Must reside in Greve in Chianti or Bagno A Ripoli, Italy

        Subjects with modertative cognitive problems will be included as long as the consent can
        be read and signed by by a first-degree relative of the participant or, in absence of
        first-degree relative, another relative living with or close to the participant

        EXCLUSION CRITERIA:

        Children
