TITLE:
      Diffuse Fibrotic Lung Disease
SUMMARY:
      To determine the effects of cyclophosphamide compared with prednisone, dapsone, or high-dose
      intermittent 'pulse' therapy with methylprednisolone in patients with idiopathic pulmonary
      fibrosis. Also, to evaluate the use of intermittent, short-term, high-dose intravenous
      corticosteroids in patients with sarcoidosis. There were actually four separate clinical
      trials.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The fibrotic lung diseases represent 15 to 20 percent of the non-infectious disorders of the
      lung. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, one of the 10 general groups of fibrotic lung
      disorders, is a chronic and devastating illness resulting in death within an average of 4 to
      5 years from the onset of symptoms. Although 5 to 10 percent of these patients respond to
      corticosteroids, there is no known treatment for the remainder.

      Sarcoidosis, a generalized disorder characterized by epithelioid cell granuloma formation in
      affected organs, especially the lung and lymphoid tissue, has a clinical course that varies
      considerably from patient to patient and, in some cases, resolves spontaneously. In other
      cases, intermittent pneumonitis develops, which may result in a permanent loss of lung
      function. Large intermittent doses of corticosteroids might be superior to conventional
      high-dose corticosteroids in patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis which has not resolved
      spontaneously.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      In the randomized, non-blind cyclophosphamide versus prednisone trial, 25 to 50 patients
      with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis were assigned to treatment with prednisone or
      cyclophosphamide. At the end of 52 weeks of drug therapy, both groups were treated using
      conventional medical therapies. In the non-randomized dapsone trial, 10 fibrotic patients
      were treated with dapsone and prednisone for one year. In the double-blind, randomized
      methylprednisolone trial, 25 to 50 patients were given low-dose methylprednisolone, and, in
      addition, all patients were randomized to either high-dose methylprednisolone treatment or
      to placebo at weekly intervals for one year. In the randomized, double-blind, high-dose
      corticosteroid trial, 25 to 50 patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis were given a short
      intense course of high-dose methylprednisolone or a placebo for 6 weeks.

      The study completion date listed in this record was inferred from the last publication
      listed in the Citations section of this study record.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      No eligibility criteria
