TITLE:
      Evaluation of the Safety and Tolerance of Immunotherapy With Autologous, Ex-Vivo Expanded, HIV-Specific Cytotoxic T-Cells in HIV-Infected Patients With CD4+ Counts Between 100-400/mm3
SUMMARY:
      To determine the safety, tolerance, and feasibility of adoptive immunotherapy with
      autologous cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs) in HIV-infected patients with CD4 counts between
      100 and 400; to evaluate the immunologic, virologic, and clinical changes for up to 24 weeks
      following infusion of study therapy.

      Freshly isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes from HIV-1-seropositive individuals frequently
      lyse autologous HIV-1-expressing cells or autologous cells infected with vaccinia vectors
      encoding HIV-1-specific proteins. Administration of these cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) may
      help prevent HIV disease progression.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Freshly isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes from HIV-1-seropositive individuals frequently
      lyse autologous HIV-1-expressing cells or autologous cells infected with vaccinia vectors
      encoding HIV-1-specific proteins. Administration of these cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) may
      help prevent HIV disease progression.

      AMENDED 03/28/94:

      Patients are not accrued at the 25 billion CTL dose. Instead, a third cohort receives three
      infusions of 1 billion CTL 5-8 weeks apart.

      AMENDED 02/14/94:

      Patients infused with 1 or 5 billion CTL will be reinfused with 1 billion CTL 6-12 months
      later, and then followed for up to 12 weeks after the reinfusion.

      ORIGINAL DESIGN:

      Fifteen patients whose cells show an HIV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response are
      infused with autologous, ex-vivo expanded CTLs at a dose of 1, 5, or 25 billion cells (five
      patients per dose level). If one to three patients at a given dose develop acute toxicity,
      an additional three patients will be entered at that dose. If four patients at any given
      dose develop acute toxicity, the next lower dose will be designated as the MTD (if four
      patients develop acute toxicity in the first cohort, the study will be terminated). Patients
      are evaluated during infusion and at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 24 weeks.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Approved antiretroviral therapy and/or prophylactic PCP therapy, provided there was
             no change in such therapy in the 4 weeks prior to study entry.

          -  Other approved treatments for HIV-related diseases that are not known to affect
             cellular immune response.

          -  G-CSF.

          -  Erythropoietin.

          -  Supportive care for acute therapy-related toxicity.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV infection.

          -  CD4 count 100 - 400 cells/mm3.

          -  No current or previously documented AIDS-related opportunistic infection, malignancy,
             or encephalopathy other than mild Kaposi's sarcoma.

          -  FEV1 > 70 percent, DLCO > 50 percent predicted for height and age (initial infusion
             only).

          -  T cell lines with specific cytotoxicity against HIV-1.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Significant autoimmune disease.

          -  Non-AIDS-associated malignancy.

          -  Symptoms of cardiac disease.

          -  Dyspnea on significant exertion.

          -  Acute infiltrates on chest radiographs.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of significant arrhythmia, infarction, or heart failure.

          -  History of a major psychiatric illness.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded within 4 weeks prior to study entry:

          -  Systemic immunosuppressive therapy (i.e., steroids, cyclosporine, chemotherapy, or
             alpha-interferon).

          -  Therapy for acute infection, AIDS-related opportunistic infection, or malignancy.

          -  Experimental AIDS therapy.

        Prior Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Potentially immunosuppressive local therapy or radiation therapy for Kaposi's sarcoma
             within 4 weeks prior to study entry.

        Current substance abuse.
