TITLE:
      A Randomized, Comparative Trial of Zidovudine (AZT) Versus 2',3'-Didehydro-3'-Deoxythymidine (Stavudine; d4T) in Children With HIV Infection
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: To compare the relative safety and tolerance of oral zidovudine (AZT) versus oral
      stavudine (d4T) in symptomatic HIV-infected children.

      SECONDARY: To compare the clinical, virologic, and immunologic responses between the two
      treatment groups, and to obtain pharmacokinetic data for both drugs.

      At present, AZT is considered the drug of choice for initial treatment of most children with
      HIV infection, although disease progression or drug intolerance is associated with its
      long-term use. In preliminary studies in children, d4T, another HIV inhibitor, has been well
      tolerated, although an optimum dose has not been determined.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      At present, AZT is considered the drug of choice for initial treatment of most children with
      HIV infection, although disease progression or drug intolerance is associated with its
      long-term use. In preliminary studies in children, d4T, another HIV inhibitor, has been well
      tolerated, although an optimum dose has not been determined.

      Patients are randomized to receive either oral AZT or oral d4T. Treatment continues until
      the last patient enrolled has received 52 weeks of therapy, or until the study is
      terminated.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Recommended:

          -  PCP prophylaxis.

        Allowed:

          -  Immunoglobulin.

          -  Erythropoietin, G-CSF, and GM-CSF.

          -  Corticosteroids.

          -  Ethionamide or isoniazid for TB if no alternative is available.

          -  Pyridoxine (up to 50 mg/day) as vitamin supplement.

        Patients must have:

          -  Symptomatic HIV infection.

          -  No more than 6 weeks of prior antiretroviral or immunomodulator therapy (other than
             steroids and IVIG).

          -  Consent of parent or guardian.

        NOTE:

          -  Coenrollment on another ACTG protocol not involving antiretroviral therapy is
             permitted.

        Prior Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Maternal immunomodulator or antiretroviral therapy (including during pregnancy).

          -  Antiretroviral therapy prior to 2 months.

          -  Up to 6 weeks of prior antiretroviral therapy or specific immunomodulator therapy
             (other than corticosteroids and IVIG).

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Current grade 3 or worse neuropathy / lower motor neuropathy.

          -  Other grade 3 or worse clinical or laboratory toxicities.

          -  Known intolerance to either AZT or d4T.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Chemotherapy for active malignancy.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of grade 3 or worse neuropathy/lower motor neuropathy.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  More than 6 weeks of prior antiretroviral or immunomodulator therapy.

          -  Antiretroviral or immunomodulator therapy within 7 days prior to study entry. Ongoing
             drug or alcohol abuse.
