TITLE:
      Laparoscopic Appendectomy for Chronic Right Lower Abdominal Pain
SUMMARY:
      It is questionable whether elective appendectomy can effectively reduce pain in persistent
      or recurrent lower abdominal quadrant pain due to chronic appendicitis.

      A single centre randomised double-blind sham surgery controlled clinical trial studied the
      effects of elective laparoscopic appendectomy on postoperative pain perception in patients
      with persistent or recurrent lower abdominal quadrant pain on abdominal pain at 6 months
      postoperatively. Secondary outcome was the relation between clinical response and the
      appendix’ histopathology. The analysis was performed on an intention-to-treat basis. Pain
      scores were compared using a Fisher’s exact test.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Forty patients were randomised, 18 patients had a laparoscopic appendectomy and 22 patients
      had a laparoscopic inspection only. The postoperative pain scores were significantly
      different favouring appendix removal (p < 0.01). Relative risk calculations indicated a 2.4
      fold (95% CI: 1.3 – 4.0) greater chance of improving or becoming pain free after
      laparoscopic appendectomy. The number needed to treat was 2.2 patients (95% CI: 1.5 – 6.5).
      There was no significant relation between postoperative pain scores and histopathology
      findings.

      Conclusions Chronic or recurrent appendicitis is a realistic clinical entity that can be
      treated successfully by elective appendectomy leading to significant pain reduction in
      properly selected cases. Histopathology of the removed appendix does not contribute to the
      diagnosis.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients were eligible if they were between 15 and 45 years of age, and if they
             suffered from chronic or recurrent right lower abdominal quadrant pain for more than
             three months. They were to experience continuous pain, or should have endured at
             least one pain attack in the month prior to inclusion.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Exclusion criteria consisted of (a history of) chronic back pain, previous abdominal
             surgery (with the exception of diagnostic laparoscopies or a laparoscopic
             sterilization), specific gastro-intestinal entities (such as inflammatory bowel
             disease) and gynaecological disease (all female patients consulted a gynaecologist).
             Routine laboratory investigations included hemoglobin rate, serum leukocyte count and
             differentiation, C-Reactive Protein concentration, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate,
             faeces cultures and urine sedimentation. Barium contrast studies of the colon were
             done in all patients, abdominal ultrasound or enteroclysis on discretion. Finally,
             exclusion was possible when diagnostic laparoscopy revealed abnormalities (see
             below).
