TITLE:
      Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT) - Intervertebral Disc Herniation
SUMMARY:
      This study tests the effectiveness of different treatments for the three most commonly
      diagnosed lumbar (lower) spine conditions. The purpose of the study is to learn which of two
      commonly prescribed treatments (surgery and non-surgical therapy) works better for specific
      types of low back pain.

      In this part of the study, people with lumbar intervertebral disc herniation (damage to the
      tissue between the bones of the lower spine, or backbone) will receive either discectomy
      (surgical removal of herniated disc material) or non-surgical treatment. This study does not
      cover the cost of treatment.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Low back pain is considered one of the most widely experienced health problems in the United
      States and the world. This condition is the second most frequent condition, after the common
      cold, for which people see a physician or lose days from work. Estimated costs to those who
      are severely disabled from low back pain range from $30-70 billion annually. Rates of spinal
      surgery in the U.S. have increased sharply over time, and researchers have documented
      15-fold geographic variation in rates of these surgeries. In many cases, where one lives and
      who one sees for the problem appear to determine the rates of surgery. Despite these trends,
      there is little evidence proving the effectiveness of these therapies over non-surgical
      management.

      Overall, the SPORT study is a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial for the three most
      common diagnostic groups for which spine surgery is performed: lumbar intervertebral disc
      herniation (IDH), spinal stenosis (SpS) and spinal stenosis secondary to degenerative
      spondylolisthesis (DS). This arm of the trial will deal with patients from the first
      diagnostic group. The study will compare the most commonly used standard surgical treatments
      to the most commonly used standard non-surgical treatments. We will conduct the study at 12
      sites throughout the United States.

      The primary endpoint of the study will be changes in health-related quality of life as
      measured by the SF-36 health status questionnaire. Secondary endpoints will include patient
      satisfaction with treatment, utility for current health in order to estimate
      quality-adjusted life years (QALYS) as the measure for cost-effectiveness, resource use, and
      cost.

      We will follow patients at 6 weeks and 3, 6, 12, and 24 months to determine their health
      status, function, satisfaction, and use of health care. In this arm of the trial, we
      anticipate enrolling and randomly allocating a total of 500 participants. We will track an
      additional observational cohort to assess health and resource outcomes (1000 participants).
      Enrollment in the Observational cohort has been completed as of February 2003.

      We will integrate data from the trial and observational cohorts to formally estimate the
      cost-effectiveness of surgical versus non-surgical interventions for IDH, SpS, and DS. On
      the basis of the results of this trial we will, for the first time, have scientific evidence
      as to the relative effectiveness of surgical versus non-surgical treatment for these three
      most commonly diagnosed lumbar spine conditions.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Duration of symptoms: 6 or more weeks.

          -  Treatments tried: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medical therapy and physical
             therapy.

          -  Surgical screening: Persistent radicular pain provoked by moderate exercise, sitting,
             increased abdominal pressure, decreased mobility, list (scoliosis), straight leg
             raising.

          -  Tests: MRI to confirm diagnosis and level(s).

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Previous lumbar spine surgery.

          -  Not a surgical candidate for any of these reasons: Overall health which makes spinal
             surgery too life-threatening to be an appropriate alternative, dramatic improvement
             with conservative care, or inability (for any reason) to undergo surgery within 6
             months.

          -  Possible pregnancy.

          -  Active malignancy: A patient with a history of any invasive malignancy (except
             non-melanoma skin cancer) is ineligible unless he or she has been treated with a
             curative intent AND there has been no clinical signs or symptoms of the malignancy
             for at least 5 years.

          -  Current fracture, infection, and/or deformity (greater than 15 degrees of lumbar
             scoliosis, using Cobb measure technique) of the spine.

          -  Age less than 18 years.

          -  Cauda Equina syndrome or progressive neurological deficit (usually requiring urgent
             surgery).

          -  Unavailability for follow-up (planning to move, no telephone, etc.) or inability to
             complete data surveys.

          -  Symptoms less than 6 weeks.

          -  Patient currently enrolled in any experimental "spine related" study.
