TITLE:
      Randomized Study of Two Interventions for Liquid Aspiration: Short-Term and Long-Term Effects
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine whether chin-down posture or use of a thickened
      liquid diet is more effective in the prevention of aspiration and aspiration pneumonia in
      patients with Parkinson's disease and/or dementia. Liquid aspiration is the most common type
      of aspiration in older populations, especially those suffering from debilitation, dementia,
      and depression. Pneumonia may develop as a consequence of aspiration and is the fifth
      leading cause of death in the US among persons age 65 years and over. Current treatment
      involves either use of chin-down position with swallowing or use of thickened liquids in the
      diet, without any clear evidence supporting the use of one treatment over the other. This is
      a Phase III inpatient and/or outpatient study in which all participants will be randomly
      assigned to either the chin-down position or the thickened liquid treatment group based on
      swallowing function during a modified barium swallow. This study is scheduled to recruit
      patients for a three-year period; participation by each individual patient spans no more
      than three months after entry.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Have dementia or Parkinson's disease and are found to aspirate on thin liquid during
             a set of qualifying swallows.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Have smoked more than a pack of cigarettes per day in the last year.

          -  Drink more than 3 alcoholic beverages per day on a regular basis.

          -  Have had any head and neck cancer treatment.

          -  Have any head and neck anatomic deformities.

          -  Have a history of 20 years or longer of insulin-dependent diabetes.

          -  Have other exclusionary neurologic diagnoses.

          -  Have had pneumonia within 6 weeks of screening.

          -  Currently have a nasogastric tube.

          -  Currently have a tracheotomy.

          -  Are a resident in non-participating nursing home or assisted living environment.

          -  Live alone.

          -  Have no regular care provider present at meals.

          -  Have no Speech-Language Pathologist to provide a 3-month follow-up.
