TITLE:
      Penicillin Prophylaxis in Sickle Cell Disease (PROPS)
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether the regular daily administration of oral penicillin would reduce the
      incidence of documented infection due to Streptococcus pneumoniae in children with sickle
      cell anemia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      For over 20 years children with sickle cell anemia have been known to have an increased
      susceptibility to severe bacterial infection, particularly due to Streptococcus pneumoniae.
      Meningitis, pneumonia and septicemia due to this organism have been recognized as the major
      causes of death for these children, with children under three years of age being at highest
      risk. The annual incidence of pneumococcal septicemia among young children with sickle cell
      anemia appears to have remained remarkably constant over the last two decades at
      approximately 10 percent. This illness can often be fulminant, progressing from the onset of
      fever to death in less than 12 hours, with a case fatality rate ranging as high as 35
      percent.

      Penicillin prophylaxis has been advocated as a preventive measure against severe
      pneumococcal infections in children with sickle cell anemia. One study had shown that the
      risk of pneumococcal infection in these children could be reduced by the use of parenteral
      penicillin.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Phase I was a multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. One hundred
      and five patients were assigned to the penicillin group and 110 to placebo. The primary
      endpoint was a documented severe infection due to S. pneumoniae. The secondary endpoint was
      a severe infection due to an organism other than S. pneumoniae.

      Because data were not available to define the age at which prophylactic penicillin could be
      safely discontinued, the NHLBI launched Phase II of the Prophylactic Penicillin Study
      beginning in 1987. Recruitment ended in August, 1993. The clinical phase of Phase II ended
      in August, 1994.

      Phase II was a multi-center randomized trial to evaluate the hazards of discontinuing daily
      oral penicillin at the age of five years. Within three months of their fifth birthdays, all
      children were randomized to continue oral penicillin prophylaxis or to stop prophylaxis.
      Each child was followed for a minimum of two years. The primary endpoint was a comparison of
      documented pneumococcal infection in children continuing penicillin after five years of age
      versus children whose prophylaxis was stopped at five years of age. Ancillary studies
      conducted in subsets of patients included: the prevalence of colonization of the nasopharynx
      with antibiotic resistant microorangisms; and the relationship of antibody response to
      pneumococcal vaccination to the incidence of pneumococcal sepsis in this patient population.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      In the Phase I trial, Black children with sickle cell anemia aged 3 months to 3 years. In
        the Phase II trial, children with sickle cell anemia aged five years 3 months of age and
        younger who had received prophylactic penicillin for at least two yea
