TITLE:
      Studies of the Ocular Complications of AIDS (SOCA)--Monoclonal Antibody CMV Retinitis Trial (MACRT)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the efficacy and safety of a human anti-CMV monoclonal antibody, MSL-109, as
      adjunct therapy for controlling CMV retinitis.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      CMV retinitis is the most common intraocular infection in patients with AIDS and is
      estimated to affect 35 to 40 percent of patients with AIDS. Untreated CMV retinitis is a
      progressive disorder, the end result of which is total retinal destruction and blindness. As
      of September 1996, drugs approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
      for the treatment of CMV retinitis were ganciclovir (Cytovene), foscarnet (Foscavir), and
      cidofovir (Vistide). All systemically administered anti-CMV drugs are given in a similar
      fashion consisting of initial 2-week high-dose treatment (induction) to control the
      infection followed by long-term lower dose treatment (maintenance) to prevent relapse.
      Ganciclovir is available in both intravenous and oral formulations, foscarnet only in an
      intravenous formulation, and cidofovir is given by intermittent intravenous administration.
      A surgically implanted intraocular sustained-release ganciclovir device (Vitrasert) is also
      approved by the FDA for the treatment of CMV retinitis.

      Despite the use of continuous maintenance therapy, given enough time, all patients with CMV
      retinitis on systemically administered drugs relapse. Preliminary studies suggested that the
      anti-CMV monoclonal antibody, MSL-109, when administered in conjunction with ganciclovir,
      markedly prolonged the time to relapse. Therefore, a randomized controlled clinical trial
      evaluating MSL-109 as adjunct therapy was conducted.

      The MACRT was a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter clinical trial evaluating the
      efficacy and safety of MSL-109 as adjunct therapy for the treatment of CMV retinitis.
      Patients with CMV retinitis, both those newly diagnosed and those suffering a relapse with
      active retinitis, were eligible. Primary therapy (e.g., ganciclovir, foscarnet, etc.) was
      determined by the treating local physician. The patients enrolled in the trial were
      randomized to either MSL-109 or placebo, administered as a rapid intravenous infusion every
      2 weeks. Outcomes included survival, retinitis progression, change in amount of retinal area
      involved by CMV, loss of visual function (acuity and field), and morbidity.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria:

          -  13 years or older at entry

          -  Diagnosis of AIDS according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
             definition

          -  Diagnosis of active CMV retinitis as determined by a SOCA-certified ophthalmologist
             at time of enrollment

          -  At least one lesion whose size is one-quarter or more optic disc area

          -  Currently receiving (for relapsed patients) or scheduled to receive (for newly
             diagnosed patients) drugs for primary treatment of CMV retinitis that are not
             contraindicated for use with MSL-109

          -  Visual acuity, in at least one eye that meets other eligibility criteria, of 3 or
             more letters on ETDRS chart at 1 meter distance (Snellen equivalent 5/200). Patients
             with poorer visual acuity may be enrolled if the visual acuity impairment is possibly
             reversible (eg, due to optic disc edema) and vision is at least light perception in
             that eye

          -  Karnofsky score of 60 or more

          -  Willingness and ability, with the assistance of a caregiver if necessary, to comply
             with treatment and follow up procedures

          -  signed consent statement

        Exclusion criteria:

          -  Current treatment with intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), CMV immune globulin
             (CMVIG), alpha-interferon (alpha-IFN), gamma-interferon (gamma-IFN) or interleukin-2
             (IL-2)

          -  Media opacity that precludes visualization of the fundus in all eyes meeting
             eligibility criteria

          -  Active medical problems, including drug or alcohol abuse, that are considered
             sufficient to hinder compliance with treatment or follow up procedures

          -  Retinal detachment, not scheduled for surgical repair, in all eyes meeting other
             eligibility criteria
