TITLE:
      Support, Health, and Fibromyalgia
SUMMARY:
      This study tests the effects of social support and education on the health and well-being of
      people with fibromyalgia (FMS). We recruited 600 adults with a confirmed diagnosis of FMS
      from a large health maintenance organization. We randomly assigned the study participants to
      one of three groups. People in the social support group met with others who suffer from FMS
      for 2 hours every week for 10 weeks, and then monthly for an additional 10 months. The
      social support and education group also had 10 2-hour weekly meetings followed by 10 monthly
      meetings with others who suffer from FMS. Members of this group learned about the disease
      and ways they can manage it themselves. The third group participated only in the five
      assessment periods. The study lasted 4 years.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Next to osteoarthritis, FMS is the most common arthritis-related disease. Symptoms include
      musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, headaches, irritable bowel syndrome, morning stiffness, and
      sleep disturbances. Fluctuating severity, pain, and frustration with the difficulty of
      diagnosis and treatment lead patients to continually seek help from health care
      professionals. There is no known cause or cure for this disease.

      This study tests the effects of social support and education on the health and well-being of
      people with fibromyalgia (FMS). We recruited 600 adults with a confirmed diagnosis of FMS
      from a large health maintenance organization. To be eligible, people had to meet the
      American College of Rheumatology guidelines for FMS. After we confirmed the diagnosis, we
      assigned those who agreed to participate to one of three groups. The first group (social
      support) met with others who suffer from FMS for 2 hours every week for 10 weeks, and then
      monthly for an additional 10 months. The second group (social support and education) also
      had 10 2-hour weekly meetings followed by 10 monthly meetings with others who suffer from
      FMS, and its members learned about the disease and self-management techniques. The third
      group (control) participated only in the five assessment periods. We assessed people in all
      three groups before we assigned them to a group, after the intervention, and at yearly
      follow-ups. The study duration was 4 years.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  A diagnosis of fibromyalgia documented in medical records and confirmed using The
             American College of Rheumatology criteria for classification of FMS: (1) A history of
             widespread pain (pain on both sides of the body, above and below the waist, and
             present for at least 3 months). (2) Pain in 11 or more of 18 tender-point sites.

          -  Patient willing to attend 10 weekly meetings and 10 monthly meetings.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who do not meet ACR criteria for FMS described above.

          -  Patients who cannot attend meetings once a week for 10 weeks and once a month for 10
             months were excluded.
