TITLE:
      Vitamin E and C to Slow Progression of Common Carotid Artery Plaque Build-Up
SUMMARY:
      This study will evaluate the effects of vitamin E supplementation in retarding the
      progression of common carotid artery intima-media thickening in African Americans.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Evidence from epidemiologic studies, and from one unpublished study, suggests that greater
      intake of antioxidant vitamins is associated with reduced risk of coronary heart disease and
      stroke. Findings from an animal model indicate that increased intake of antioxidant vitamins
      prevents progression of aortic fatty streaks induced by an atherogenic diet, but not from
      more advanced injury-induced lesions. These observations suggest the hypothesis that
      increased antioxidant vitamin intake may prevent further progression of early
      atherosclerosis, possibly by means of reduced susceptibility of low density lipoprotein to
      oxidative modification and consequent cytotoxic, chemotactic, chemostatic, and unregulated
      uptake effects.

      A new, automated, low-cost, portable ultrasound system for determining intima-media
      thickness of the common carotid artery makes it feasible to test the primary prevention
      impact of antioxidant vitamins on early atherosclerosis. Results of two studies at the
      University of Southern California suggest that the low-density lipoprotein effects on common
      carotid artery intima-media thickness can be detected by automated methods within 12 to 24
      months in small patient samples. Retardation of intima-media thickness progression was
      achieved in both studies without significant changes in average vessel diameter, which
      suggests effects on early atherosclerotic lesions.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Patients will be screened for carotid intima-media thickness at home or at schools in mobile
      vans equipped with portable ultrasound equipment. After 12 months, those patients above the
      age and sex-adjusted 66th percentile at Screen I will be re-screened (Screen II), and those
      showing the greatest progression in intima-media thickness will be invited to participate in
      a trial run-in to assess vitamin E compliance. Patients will be randomized to the following
      four groups: 1) vitamin E (573 mg/day); 2) vitamin C; 3) Vitamin E and C combined; and 4)
      placebo. Common carotid artery intima-media thickness will be observed by ultrasound at 12-
      and 24-month follow-ups. The primary outcome is 24-month rate of change in average common
      carotid artery intima-media thickness.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  African American
