TITLE:
      The Collaborative Longitudinal Evaluation of Keratoconus (CLEK) Study
SUMMARY:
      To describe the clinical course of keratoconus and to describe the relationships among its
      visual and physiological manifestations, including high- and low-contrast visual acuity,
      corneal curvature, slit lamp biomicroscopic findings, corneal scarring, and quality of life.

      To identify risk factors and protective factors that influence the severity and progression
      of keratoconus.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Keratoconus is a bilateral, asymmetric, chronic, progressive ectasia of the cornea
      characterized by steepening and distortion of the cornea, thinning of the apical cornea,
      corneal scarring, and treatment-related sequelae, such as abrasions from contact lenses and
      surgical complications. Patients experience distorted vision that worsens with disease
      progression. Their vision is typically corrected with spectacles early in the disease and,
      later, with rigid contact lenses. Some patients eventually undergo corneal transplantation
      in one or both eyes. Keratoconus affects people in their prime earning years and profoundly
      affects their lives.

      Previous large-scale studies of keratoconus have focused on incidence and prevalence,
      etiologies, or the clinical management of keratoconus. Few have characterized the course of
      the disease and risk factors for its progression in large samples of keratoconus patients.
      The incidence of vision-threatening corneal scarring in keratoconus is unknown. Patient's
      most frequent questions--how rapidly their keratoconus will progress, how bad their vision
      will become, whether they will need corneal surgery, how successful their contact lenses
      will be--cannot be answered on the basis of the current body of knowledge.

      The need for a prospective, observational study of keratoconus patients is great. Results
      from this study will address keratoconus patient's unanswered questions and will enable eye
      care practitioners to manage this complex ocular disease better.

      The Collaborative Longitudinal Evaluation of Keratoconus (CLEK) Study is a multicenter,
      observational study of 1,209 keratoconus patients followed for 3 years.

      Patients are examined annually. Study measures include visual acuity, patient-reported
      quality of life, manifest refraction, keratometry, photodocumentation of the cornea to
      identify central corneal scarring, photodocumentation of the flattest contact lens that just
      clears the cornea, slit lamp biomicroscopy, and corneal topography. In rigid contact lens
      wearers, the fluorescein pattern of the patient's habitual contact lenses is
      photodocumented.

      Patients are examined at 15 clinical centers. The clinical centers enrolled 1,209 patients
      in 12 months.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients with keratoconus were eligible if they were at least 12 years old; had an
        irregular cornea as determined by keratometry, retinoscopy, or direct ophthalmoscopy in at
        least one eye; had Vogt's striae, Fleischer's ring, or corneal scarring characteristic of
        keratoconus in at least one eye; and planned to stay in the area for at least 3 years.
        They were ineligible if they had bilateral corneal transplants or bilateral nonkeratoconic
        eye disease (cataract, intraocular lenses, macular disease, or optic nerve disease other
        than glaucoma).
