TITLE:
      Delirium in the Emergency Department: Novel Screening
SUMMARY:
      Delirium is an acute confusional state characterized by altered or fluctuating mental
      status, inattention, and either disorganized thinking or an altered level of consciousness.
      This form of organ dysfunction occurs in up to 10% of older emergency department (ED)
      patients and is associated with worsening mortality, prolonged hospital length of stay,
      higher health care costs, and accelerated functional and cognitive decline. Despite the
      negative consequences of delirium, the majority of cases are unrecognized by emergency
      physicians because it is not routinely screened for. In an effort to facilitate delirium
      screening, the investigators sought to validate three brief delirium assessments in the ED
      setting.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Delirium is often missed because emergency physicians do not routinely screen for this
      diagnosis. Most delirium assessments can take up to 10 minutes to perform making them less
      likely to be incorporated into the routine physician assessment. Using brief (<2 minutes)
      and easy to use delirium assessments may ameliorate this quality of care issue. The
      Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU) possesses these
      characteristics, but has only been validated in mechanically and non-mechanically ventilated
      intensive care unit patients. Recently, the investigators also developed the Brief Confusion
      Assessment Method (B-CAM) which is a modification of the CAM-ICU. The benefit is that it
      takes even less time than the CAM-ICU. The investigators also developed the Emergency
      Department Delirium Triage Screen (ED-DTS) designed to be highly sensitive and moderately
      specific delirium assessment for the nurse's triage assessment. It is hypothesized that a
      negative ED-DTS would rule out delirium, while a positive ED-DTS would require a more formal
      delirium assessment such as the CAM-ICU and B-CAM. These new delirium assessments require
      validation in older ED patients. As result, the investigators propose the following and the
      following specific aims:

      Aim #1: To validate the B-CAM in older ED patients. The B-CAM will be performed by a
      clinical trials associate (CTA) and principal investigator in 200 ED patients that are > 65
      years old. This instrument will be validated against a psychiatrist's Diagnostic and
      Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th. Edition Text Revision assessment as the
      reference standard.

      Aim #2: To validate the CAM-ICU in older ED patients. The CAM-ICU will be performed by a
      clinical trials associate (CTA) and principal investigator in approximately 200 ED patients
      that are > 65 years old. This instrument will be validated against a psychiatrist's
      Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th. Edition Text Revision assessment
      as the reference standard.

      Aim #3: To validate the ED-DTS in older ED patients. The ED-DTS will be performed by a
      clinical trials associate (CTA) and principal investigator in 200 ED patients that are > 65
      years old. This instrument will be validated against a psychiatrist's Diagnostic and
      Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th. Edition Text Revision assessment as the
      reference standard.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  65 years of age or greater

          -  In the Emergency Department for less than 12 hour at the time of enrollment

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Severe mental retardation or dementia

          -  Baseline communication barriers such as aphasia, deafness, blindness, or who are
             unable to speak English

          -  Refusal of consent

          -  Previous enrollment

          -  Comatose

          -  Out of the hospital before the assessments are completed
