TITLE:
      Soy Estrogen Alternative Study (SEA)
SUMMARY:
      To conduct a three-armed trial assessing the effect of soy phytoestrogens on menopausal
      complaints, plasma lipids and lipoproteins, vaginal bleeding and endometrial proliferation,
      and health related quality of life.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The results of many studies indicate that estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) reduces the
      risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) in postmenopausal women. However, less than 9 percent
      of these women choose to take ERT because of unwanted side effects and concerns about
      increased risk of cancer associated with ERT. Therefore, alternative therapies are needed.

      The isoflavonoids found in soy protein (specifically genistein) have many properties that
      may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease. These include favorable effects on plasma
      lipids and coronary artery vasomotion. Furthermore, genistein is a tyrosine kinase (TK)
      inhibitor with inhibitory effects on thrombin activity and TK receptor-linked mitogens that
      may be associated with atherogenesis and neointimal formation after angioplasty.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled. The women were randomized into one of three
      groups: placebo, conjugated equine estrogens, or soy supplementation. Primary endpoints were
      the impact on menopausal complaints such as hot flushes, mood lability, anxiety, sleep
      disturbances; effects on plasma lipids and lipoproteins, including lipoprotein (a); effects
      on vaginal bleeding and endometrial proliferation; changes in health-related quality of
      life. Secondary endpoints included: assessment of the impact of these interventions on the
      progression of carotid artery intimal medial wall thickening as assessed by B-mode
      ultrasonography; bone density and bone turnover; additional measures to monitor the
      compliance and safety of the intervention such as mammography, anticipated or known side
      effects of hormone replacement therapy, blood levels of genistein, and clinical outcomes
      such as hospitalizations, physician visits, and symptoms. The study ended in December, 1998.

      The study was a subproject within a program project on coronary atherosclerosis in females,
      primarily monkeys. Dr. Thomas B. Clarkson was the P.I. The subproject dollars were estimated
      based on the CRISP dollars assigned to the study which were approximately 12 percent of the
      total program project dollars and were broken down as follows: FY 1996 - 219,254; FY 1997 -
      $217,000; FY 1998 - $221,000.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Perimenopausal/menopausal women, ages 45 to 55.
