TITLE:
      Trial of Antihypertensive Intervention Management
SUMMARY:
      The objective of the Trial of Antihypertensive Intervention Management (TAIM) was to
      determine the efficacy of dietary management and/or drug therapy, namely thiazide-like
      diuretics or a beta-blocker, in the control of mild hypertension. Additionally, the
      Continuation of the Trial of Antihypertensive Intervention Management (COTAIM) tested the
      effects of long-term weight reduction, and sodium/potassium changes added to weight
      reduction, as well as the original drug treatment, on the failure rate of blood pressure
      control.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The Trial of Antihypertensive Intervention Management was an extension of the
      NHLBI-supported Dietary Intervention Study of Hypertension (DISH) which concluded in March
      1984 and showed that either weight reduction or sodium restriction diets reduced relapse
      rates of hypertensives who had received long-term drug treatment and then been withdrawn
      from drugs. TAIM was initiated in April 1984 and continued for four years at three centers
      and added to DISH the art of evaluating combined drug and dietary treatments. COTAIM was
      continued at three clinical sites in July 1988. Analysis of COTAIM results continued through
      November 1994 under grant R01HL40072.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      TAIM patients were randomly assigned to one of three diets and to one of three drug
      regimens. The dietary interventions consisted of a weight loss program, sodium reduction
      with increased potassium intake, or no change in diet. The drug regimen consisted of a
      beta-blocker (atenolol), a thiazide-like diuretic (chlorthalidone), or placebo. The major
      endpoint was change in diastolic blood pressure after six months of intervention.
      Individuals who did not reach goal blood pressure after six months received additional
      drugs. Other endpoints included total risk factor score change, psychological function, and
      lifestyle change.

      COTAIM consisted of two studies with a total of 600 subjects. COTAIM I compared the TAIM
      weight loss group to a randomly selected half of the usual diet group. The primary endpoint
      of COTAIM I was the degree of control of blood pressure on initial TAIM therapy between TAIM
      baseline and the end of COTAIM, a five year period.

      COTAIM II added a weight loss regimen both to the sodium restriction/potassium
      supplementation groups and to the other half of the usual diet group. The primary outcome
      was control of blood pressure on initial TAIM therapy between COTAIM baseline and the end of
      COTAIM, a two-year period.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 21 to 65, with mild hypertension in the range of 90 to 100 mm Hg
        diastolic blood pressure.

        Subjects were obese (110-150 percent of ideal weight).
