TITLE:
      Racial Variation in ACE--Genetic and Physiologic Bases
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether differences in the activity of the renin-angiotensin and bradykinin
      systems are involved in the pathogenesis of blood pressure variation in African Americans.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Each year, more than 40,000 new patients require treatment for end stage renal disease, a
      condition which is 4-fold higher among African Americans than Caucasians. Trials of
      angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) in Caucasians support a role of the
      renin-angiotensin system in the pathogenesis of glomerulosclerosis. Yet, despite the high
      prevalence of nephropathy among African Americans, Blacks have been under-represented in
      studies in ACEIs. Data from our laboratory suggest that the renal effects of ACEI may differ
      in African Americans. African Americans are resistant to the anti-hypertensive effects of
      ACEI and, thus, may be resistant to the renoprotective effects as well. The ACE deletion
      allele, a variant associated with increased ACE activity and progression of renal diseases,
      is increased in frequency in African Americans, while the frequency of the Ang AT1 receptor
      C allele, a variant associated with antihypertensive responsiveness to ACEI is decreased.
      Moreover, African Americans exhibit decreased sensitivity to Ang I and increased sensitivity
      to bradykinin. Taken together, these data suggest the hypothesis that ACE activity is
      increased in African Americans, leading to decreased bradykinin levels ( and receptor
      sensitization) and increased tissue Ang II (and receptor desensitization).

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The study tests the hypothesis that ACE activity is increased in African Americans, leading
      to decreased bradykinin levels (and receptor sensitization) and increased tissue Ang II (and
      receptor desensitization). The effects of race, hypertension and ACE insertion/deletion
      genotype on ACE activity will be determined, as measured by the pressor and renal
      vasoconstrictor responses to Ang I and Ang II and the vasodilator response to bradykinin.
      Specific bradykinin and angiotensin receptor antagonists will be used to determine the
      relative contribution of increased bradykinin and decreased angiotensin II to the renal
      hemodynamic effects of ACEIs in African Americans and Caucasians.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      No eligibility criteria
