TITLE:
      A Phase I Trial of Intranasal Peptide T: Safety, Toxicity, and Pharmacokinetics in Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 (HIV-1) Infected Patients.
SUMMARY:
      To study the safety and toxicity of intranasal peptide T (D-Ala-1-peptide-T-amide) in
      humans, and to find out how quickly and how much of a given dose enters the bloodstream and
      how quickly it leaves the bloodstream. To obtain information on the ability of intranasal
      peptide T to prevent, halt, and/or reverse the effects of AIDS on the central nervous
      system.

      Studies have shown that AIDS is caused by a retrovirus. This virus works by inactivating or
      destroying human CD4 cells (which are part of the human immune system). This in turn leads
      to the observed immunologic defects and related illnesses, including HIV encephalopathy
      (disease of the brain). One method of preventing AIDS is to prevent HIV from entering the
      cell. HIV binds to the receptor CD4 site. Peptide T also binds to this site, and thus by
      competing for that site, can block the binding of the virus to its receptor. Preliminary
      animal and human studies indicate that peptide T is safe at the doses selected for this
      trial.

      Thirty patients with AIDS or AIDS related complex (ARC) are entered into the study to
      receive an increasing schedule of three dosage levels of intranasal peptide T for 12 - 16
      weeks followed by a 1-month off-drug follow-up period and a subsequent 1-month return to the
      drug. All patients receive an initial intravenous test dose of peptide T. The test dose is
      administered over 1 hour, followed by an observation period of 8 hours in the outpatient
      clinic.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients must have:

        HIV infection. Ability to give informed consent. Ability to participate in an outpatient
        study.

          -  Allowed: Short course antimicrobials.

          -  Not breast-feeding

          -  Abstinence or agree to use barrier methods of birth control / contraception during
             the study

          -  Not pregnant

          -  Negative pregnancy test

          -  CD4 100 to 500 cells/mm3 (100 - 200 - 300 - 400 - 500).

          -  Creatinine > 1.6 mg/dl

          -  Hemoglobin >= 12 g/dl

          -  Platelet Count >= 100000 /mm3

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Excluded: Asymptomatic HIV seropositive or lymphadenopathy syndrome diagnoses only
             (CDC criteria).

          -  Patients with the following conditions are excluded: Evidence of life-threatening
             opportunistic infection at time of entry into trial. Clinical evidence of active
             central nervous system disease secondary to immune dysregulation associated with HIV
             infection. Previous history of major psychiatric illness prior to 1977 or the time of
             initial exposure to HIV, if that is known. Evidence of clinically significant major
             psychiatric disturbance other than depression.

          -  Excluded within 4 weeks of study entry: Suramin. Antiretroviral agents. Anticancer
             treatments. Psychoactive agents.

          -  Excluded: Antivirals or immunomodulators.

          -  Excluded within 4 weeks of study entry: Radiation.

          -  Evidence of active substance abuse during 30 days prior to entry into trial. All
             behavior that can put patient at risk for reinfection with HIV: sexual contact with
             others known to have HIV infection, unsafe sexual practices, or sharing of needles or
             other intravenous equipment.

          -  Breast-feeding

          -  Positive pregnancy test

          -  Pregnant

          -  No abstinence or no agreement to use barrier methods of birth control / contraception
             during the study
