TITLE:
      DNA Methylation and Autoimmune Thyroid Diseases
SUMMARY:
      Hashimoto Thyroiditis (HT) and Graves Disease (GD) are known to be caused by abnormal immune
      response against self cells and tissues. Epigenetics is a novel field of biology studying
      the mechanisms by which the environment interacts with the genotype to produce a variety of
      phenotypes through modifications to chromatin that do not directly alter the DNA sequence. A
      very limited number of epigenetic studies have been published in patients with HT and GD so
      far. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to analyze DNA methylation status in White
      Blood Cells (WBCs) within the promoter regions of genomic sites that have been previously
      identified as susceptibility loci or sites for autoimmune thyroid disease, such as the CD40,
      FOXP3, CTLA4, PTPN22, CD25, and TPO genes.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Hashimoto Thyroiditis (HT) and Graves Disease (GD) are known to be caused by abnormal immune
      response against self cells and tissues. HT involves a cell-mediated autoimmune destruction
      of the thyroid leading to hypothyroidism. GD is caused by a process in which immune cells
      make stimulating antibodies against the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor on the
      thyroid gland, thus leading to hyperthyroidism. Although there is substantial evidence that
      genetic factors increase the risk for developing autoimmune diseases, monozygotic twins
      still remain discordant for disease (disease concordance is never 100%), thus suggesting a
      role for environmental factors and epigenetics.

      Epigenetics is a novel field of biology studying the mechanisms by which the environment
      interacts with the genotype to produce a variety of phenotypes through modifications to
      chromatin that do not directly alter the DNA sequence. These modifications have been
      associated with altered gene expression and silencing of repetitive elements and can be
      inherited mitotically. Epigenetic mechanisms include DNA methylation, histone modifications,
      or miRNA post-transcriptional regulation. DNA methylation involves the covalent addition of
      a methyl group to the carbon-5 position in the CpG dinucleotide from the methyl donor
      S-adenosylmethionine and is mediated by a group of enzymes called DNA methyltransferases
      (DNMTs). CpG dinucleotides are typically grouped together in regions known as CGIs
      (islands). CGIs can be found in the promoter regions of genes, and CpG methylation of these
      gene promoters is associated with transcriptional silencing. In contrast, hypermethylated
      genes have been found to be transcriptionally active.

      A very limited number of epigenetic studies have been published in patients with HT and GD
      so far. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to analyze DNA methylation status in White
      Blood Cells (WBCs) within the promoter regions of genomic sites that have been previously
      identified as susceptibility loci or sites for autoimmune thyroid disease, such as the CD40,
      FOXP3, CTLA4, PTPN22, CD25, and TPO genes.

      Initially, recruitment of patients and controls as well as blood sample collection will be
      done. A complete physical examination will also be performed in all participants included in
      the study, and a detailed personal, family, gestational and perinatal history will be
      obtained as well before inclusion. Blood samples by all participants will be collected and
      centrifuged and then White Blood Cells (WBCs), plasma and serum will be separated and stored
      in a deep freezer.

      Laboratory analyses will follow. DNA will be isolated from peripheral leukocytes using the
      standard phenol chloroform technique. It will then be treated with sodium bisulfite using
      the Zymo EZ DNA Methylation-Gold Kit, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Therefore,
      unmethylated cytosines will be converted into uracyls, whereas methylated cytosines will
      remain unchanged. Afterwards, a PCR reaction will be performed, targeting specific sequences
      in the promoter region of specific gene promoters (using specific primers). Amplicons will
      then be analyzed by electrophoresis and visualized by ultraviolet trans-illumination, and
      PCR products will be purified using Millipore Centrifugal Filters for DNA purification. A
      sequence analysis will also be performed in order to quantitatively describe the methylation
      status at the genetic loci under study.

      Finally, online bioinformatics resources will be employed for aligning the obtained
      sequences (e.g., BLAST - http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and subsequently
      identifying their methylated and unmethylated CpGs sites. In case more flexibility and
      automation is needed, bioinformatics scripts will be developed from scratch to accomplish
      the aforementioned tasks based on powerful, open-source bioinformatics software libraries
      (e.g., Biopython - http://biopython.org/). An electronic Data Base will be constructed and
      Statistical Analysis will follow. Results and Conclusions will be published in peer-review
      journals and presented in International Meetings.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        For HT:

        A positive titers of antithyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) or antithyroglobulin (anti-Tg)
        antibodies and at least one of:

          -  Abnormal thyroid function that requires substitution treatment with L-thyroxine (TSH
             > 5 μIU/ml and decreased or normal levels of fT4 or fT3)

          -  Increased volume of thyroid gland (goiter)

          -  Morphological changes on ultrasound of the thyroid gland

        For GD:

          -  A positive titers of thyroid stimulating antibodies (anti-TSI) and

          -  Decreased TSH levels and increased levels of fT4 or fT3

        For Controls:

          -  Otherwise healthy children and adolescents, age- and gender-matched with patients

          -  Absence of previously known chronic disease of autoimmune aetiology or atopy
             (including those with a history of chronic treatment with antihistamines,
             anti-inflammatory, corticosteroids or anti-epileptic drugs)

          -  Absence of a family history of autoimmune disease in first-degree relatives

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Not Caucasian origin or affinity among participants

          -  Age of diagnosis above 18 years

          -  Disease duration below 3 months
