TITLE:
      Naltrexone Treatment for Alcoholism
SUMMARY:
      This study will evaluate the effectiveness of the medication naltrexone (Revia) for treating
      alcoholism. Individuals will be inpatients for a 2 week period and provide assessments of
      their alcohol withdrawal symptoms, craving, and mood. Following hospital discharge,
      individuals will be assigned randomly to receive naltrexone daily, naltrexone twice a day or
      a placebo. This part of the study will last 12 weeks, with regular measurements of drinking
      level, craving and mood. Assessments will be conducted 6 and 12 months after the beginning
      of the study.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for alcohol dependence.

          -  Committed to alcohol abstinence as a treatment goal.

          -  Individuals will be required to identify two family members or close friends who are
             knowledgeable about their location, drinking behavior, and psychosocial status.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for any other psychoactive substance use disorder (excluding nicotine
             and caffeine).

          -  Meets criteria for a major psychiatric disorder and are in need of or currently
             undergoing pharmacotherapy.

          -  Females who are pregnant, lactating, or not using a reliable method of contraception.

          -  Currently experiencing a serious medical condition that would place them at risk or
             interfere with study participation.

          -  Experiencing acute hepatitis or liver failure or whose liver function test is more
             than 3 times normal.

          -  Have a history of severe allergies, multiple adverse drug reactions or known allergy
             to naltrexone.

          -  Vocabulary below the 5th grade reading level.

          -  Abnormal MRI scan.

          -  HIV infection due to the neurological sequelae.

          -  Significant central nervous system diseases.

          -  Seizure disorder or history of closed head trauma.

          -  Neuroendocrine disorders.

          -  Treatment with opiates within the last six months.
