TITLE:
      MetfoRmin and Its Effects on Left Ventricular Hypertrophy in Normotensive Patients With Coronary Artery Disease
SUMMARY:
      Thickening of the heart muscle (left ventricle) known medically as Left Ventricular
      Hypertrophy (LVH) is very common in patients with heart disease. This increases risk of
      cerebrovascular/cardiovascular event.

      LVH is asymptomatic and managed by the use of medication to control blood pressure, however
      LVH may be seen in normotensive patients where factors such as obesity and insulin
      resistance are present.

      Insulin resistance is a condition where although the body produces insulin it is unable to
      utilize it effectively. Metformin, a drug used to treat diabetes, can reduce insulin
      resistance and cause weight loss, it may therefore improve LVH. This study will investigate
      the ability of metformin to reduce LVH in patients with heart disease, this may be a novel
      way forward in the risk reduction of cerebrovascular/cardiovascular events. Participants
      will be identified throughout NHS Tayside, those eligible will be randomly allocated to
      either metformin or a dummy medication (placebo) and will receive one year of treatment. At
      the beginning of the study, the thickness of the heart muscle will be measured by ultrasound
      scan and cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (cMRI). We will also perform non-invasive tests
      to measure blood vessel function. These tests will be repeated after one year. At the end of
      the study, we will investigate the difference between placebo treatment and metformin
      treatment.

      This study is funded by the British Heart Foundation.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a single centre trial designed to investigate the benefit, if any, of 12 month
      metformin XL 2000mg/day treatment on left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in 64 nondiabetic
      participants with Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) and insulin resistance (IR).

      Participants will be seen on seven occasions: screening, baseline/randomisation, 2 weeks
      post randomisation, month 1, month 4, month 8 and final month 12, during which vital signs
      and safety bloods will be performed. There will also be three telephone visits at: month 2,
      month 6 and month 10.

      At a screening visit an initial history will be performed following informed consent.
      Participants will then undergo an echocardiogram (a painless ultrasound scan of the heart)
      in the Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee. Blood pressure will
      be recorded and blood tests to determine fasting insulin resistance index (FIRI) and routine
      safety, prior to metformin administration, will be performed.

      Participants who meet all inclusion criteria will return for the randomisation visit within
      4 weeks of screening where a Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (cMRI) scan will be
      performed followed by randomisation to either Metformin XL or placebo in a double blind,
      randomised fashion. Also, at this visit endothelial function tests will be performed to
      assess peripheral blood vessels in the forearm, central obesity will be quantified using
      waist circumference and waist to hip ratio (WHR) and study specific blood sampling performed
      (with participant consent).

      At the final visit or early withdrawal the following will be performed: vital signs, safety
      bloods, study specific bloods (with participant consent), echocardiography, endothelial
      function tests and cMRI.

      In the active arm, therapy will be metformin XL in an initial dose of 1000mg/day (metformin
      XL 500mg x2/day). Participants will continue on Metformin XL 500mg x2/day for two weeks,
      following safety blood checks this dose will be increased to 2000 mg/day. If the higher dose
      cannot be tolerated it will be reduced to 1000mg/day (or stopped if not tolerated).

      The target dose of metformin XL at 2000mg/day was chosen based on a previous study of
      metformin in nondiabetic heart failure patients with IR, this study demonstrated a
      beneficial effect of metformin on insulin resistance, weight reduction and an improvement in
      submaximal exercise. The study used the immediate release form of metformin (target of 1000
      mg x2/day) which was associated with significant gastrointestinal side effects resulting in
      13% withdrawal of study medication. For this reason we have selected metformin XR due to
      improved gastrointestinal tolerability.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Aged 18 years or over

          -  Participant willing and able to give informed consent.

          -  Documented Ischaemic Heart Disease: either angio-graphically documented coronary
             artery disease or a previous history of myocardial infarction/angina.

          -  Screening echocardiography based diagnosis of LVH based on ASE criteria (males
             >115g/m2, females >95g/m2)

          -  Fasting insulin resistance index ≥ 2.7 AND/OR HbA1c >5.6 and less than 6.5 at
             screening

          -  Blood pressure < 140/85 mm Hg or 24hr BP <135/85 daytime average in screening

          -  Able (in the Investigators opinion) and willing to comply with all study
             requirements.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Cognitive impairment

          -  Type 1 or 2 Diabetes mellitus

          -  Chronic Heart Failure as evidenced by echocardiogram or documented diagnosis of CHF

          -  Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction <45% on screening echocardiography

          -  Contraindications to cardiac MRI (pacemakers, claustrophobia, metal implants, history
             of penetrative eye injury or exposure to metal fragments in eye requiring medical
             attention)

          -  Malignancy (receiving active treatment) or other life threatening disease, renal
             disease (CKD class 3B or worse)

          -  Pregnancy/lactating females

          -  Any other reason considered inappropriate by a study physician

          -  Participants who have participated in any other clinical trial within the previous 30
             days.
