TITLE:
      the Role of Total Body Imaging in Asymptomatic Pediatric Trauma Patients
SUMMARY:
      Whole body imaging has no role in asymptomatic pediatric trauma patients
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Negative physical examination alone has been shown unreliable for excluding intra-abdominal
      injuries in adult patients with multitrauma. Therefore, the management of patients with a
      normal clinical examination after blunt trauma is a subject of controversy. Since 1970s,
      computer tomography (CT) has become the mainstay of evaluating hemodynamically stable trauma
      patients. It's generally accepted that hemodynamically stable patient with abnormal
      abdominal examination results require the use of CT as well as patients with depressed level
      of consciousness. Controversy exists with the awake, clinically evaluable patients with no
      obvious signs of abdominal and chest trauma. In the last years number of studies express CT
      role in evaluation of asymptomatic trauma patient with mechanism of injury supporting
      probability of internal organs injury. Those studies show that in a large number of patients
      the management was changed according to CT results. The authors recommended liberal use of
      CT in trauma patient population. All those studies have been performed in adult trauma
      patients. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the role of whole body imaging in
      pediatric patients with suspicious mechanism of injury, which are hemodynamically stable and
      has no obvious signs of chest and abdominal injury. The incidence of injury in these patient
      population as well as changes in treatment based on results of CT will be examined. Methods
      The prospective observational study will be performed in Assaf Harofeh Medical Center. All
      patients up to 15 years old with blunt mechanism of multisystem trauma will be eligible for
      enrollment to the study. Only patients whose parents singed the inform consent will be
      enrolled.Inclusion criteria will be based on the mechanism of injury: 1. no visible injury
      of chest and abdomen2. hemodynamically stable3. normal abdominal examination in
      neurologically intact patient or unevaluable abdominal examination in patients with
      depressed level of consciousness. 4. significant mechanism of injury as any of the following
      a. high speed (more than 55km/hr) motor vehicle accident b. fall of greater than 3 meters c.
      automobile hitting pedestrian d. assaulted with depressed level of consciousness All
      patients will undergo CT of the head, chest, abdomen and pelvis as a part of their
      evaluation. CT scan will be performed in Emergency Department short after patient's
      admission and clinical evaluation. An abnormal CT will be defined as exhibiting any
      traumatic abnormality. Patient treatment plan changes will be defined as alteration in
      management based directly on CT findings.Data regarding patient demographics, mechanism of
      injury, physical examination findings, Glasgow Coma Score on emergency department admission,
      Injury Severity Score, radiologic interpretation of chest and pelvic roentgenograms,
      injuries required operative procedures, laboratory data, CT scan findings, and changes in
      management plan based on CT findings will be recorded.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All asymptomatic trauma patients from 0 to 15 years old

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Any pediatric trauma patients with clinical indications for CT scan
