TITLE:
      Stress Hormones and Human Cocaine Use - 7
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine the HPA axis and adrenergic system activation in
      response to cocaine administration.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The goal of this study was to investigate the role of sympathetic-adrenal medullary (SAM)
      and hy0pothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) systems in mediating the addictive effects of
      cocaine. A toal of 6 male subjects were enrolled for this 5 day inpatient study. Subjects
      were assigned to either cocaine (32mg /70kg iv) or placebo (saline iv) treatment during the
      first experimental sessions and were crossed over to the alternative treatment during the
      second experimental session. Endpoints that were followed during the experimental sessions
      included neuroendocrine (serum epinephrine, norepinephrine and cortisol levels),
      physological (heart rate/blood pressure, EKG) and subjective measures (Beck Depression
      Inventory, Craving Questionnaire). We hypothesized that cocaine administration would lead to
      increased blood levels of norpinephrine, epinephrine and cortisol in cocaine dependent
      subjects.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Males between the ages of 20-45. History of smoked or intravenous cocaine use on the
        average of at least once a week over a 6 month period. Current history of good health and
        normal EKG.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        History of suicide attempt, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or generalized anxiety
        disorder. Current problem with major depressive disorder. Current use of alcohol or other
        drugs on a daily basis. History of major medical illnesses. Currently on parole, probation
        or a legal history of violence. Treatment for chemical dependency within the past 6
        months. History of sensitivity to tricyclic compounds or other prescription drugs. Use of
        any psychotropic drugs including MAOIs in the past 6 months.
