TITLE:
      Thromboprophylaxis in Pregnant Women in Hospital: A Prospective Clinical Trial
SUMMARY:
      Hospitalization in pregnancy and childbirth greatly increases the thromboembolic risk of
      these patients. The application of a protocol for assessing the risk of VTE reduces
      mortality and morbidity of these phenomena.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Thromboembolic events are among the leading causes of maternal morbidity and mortality in
      pregnancy / postpartum period. They are the leading cause of maternal death in developed
      countries. Risk factors for venous thromboembolism (VTE) during pregnancy and postpartum as
      family history or personal history of VTE, thrombophilia, age over 35, obesity and high
      parity has been the most studied. One of the main risk factors is hospitalization, which
      increases up to 20 times the risk of VTE.

      Objective: The objective of the study is to identify early risk factors for VTE in
      hospitalized pregnant women and institute appropriate prophylaxis to reduce the incidence
      and morbidity.

      Methods: A prospective study that will evaluate all pregnant women admitted for clinical
      treatment and / or surgery in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Clinics Hospital,
      University of São Paulo through the application of a thromboprophylaxis protocol with risk
      assessment score. The patient in whom prophylaxis would be indicated are those with scores
      greater than or equal to 3. The drug to be used is enoxaparin and the dose to be used
      depends on the weight of the patient.

      It will be further assessed: adverse effects of treatment with enoxaparin, protocol failure
      in the group treated and untreated (without anticoagulation) and bleeding incidence in the
      untreated group.

      Risk score description: score 3 - previous thrombosis/thromboembolism, homozygous mutations,
      combined thrombophilia risk factors, antiphospholipid syndrome, cancer(stomach, pancreas,
      lung), inflammatory conditions, lupus, sickle cell disease, nephrotic syndrome, heart
      disease; Score 2 - Protein C deficiency, Protein S deficiency, heterozygous F5 Leiden,
      heterozygous F2 G20210A mutation, cancer(last 6 months), chemotherapy(last 6m), immobility,
      bed rest >4d prior to C-section, current serious infections, BMI≥40 kg/m2 , age≥40y, lung
      disease(cyanosis), postpartum hemorrhage >1L; Score 1 - age ≥ 35 and ≤39 y, parity ≥3,
      multiple pregnancy, hyperemesis, gross varicose veins, smoker ≥20, surgical procedure.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All pregnant women hospitalized.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Previous use of anticoagulation
