TITLE:
      Cholesterol Reduction in Seniors Program (CRISP)
SUMMARY:
      To conduct a pilot study to determine whether lowering elevated serum cholesterol levels
      with 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase inhibitors reduced mortality
      due to the sequelae of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in older men and women.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Circulating levels of cholesterol, specifically cholesterol associated with the low-density
      lipoprotein (LDL) fraction, have been established by observational epidemiologic studies and
      by metabolic, pathologic, genetic studies in humans and selected animal models, and by
      randomized clinical trials as a major etiologic factor in coronary heart disease. The ratio
      between the percent reduction in coronary heart disease incidence and the percent reduction
      in cholesterol levels associated with treatment in randomized trials, approximately 2:1, is
      almost exactly that predicted by numerous observational epidemiologic studies of this
      relationship. However, the clinical trials demonstrating that lowering LDL-cholesterol
      levels reduces subsequent incidence of coronary heart disease events have been confined by
      and large to middle-aged men with hypercholesterolemia as in the Lipid Research Clinics
      Coronary Primary Prevention Trial (LRC-CPPT) or to men with established coronary heart
      disease as in the Coronary Drug Project (CDP). Experimental confirmation that
      cholesterol-lowering treatment is worthwhile after as well as before age 60 is lacking.
      Thus, although the guidelines issued in October 1987 by the National Cholesterol Education
      Program's (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
      Cholesterol in Adults did not discriminate explicitly by age, the absence of direct evidence
      of efficacy led them to allow room for physician judgment in applying their recommendations
      to older patients. This uncertainty in the application of the NCEP guidelines to older men
      and women is a matter of considerable consequence to the public health.

      Epidemiologic studies suggest that the prognostic power of cholesterol levels diminishes
      with advancing age. Subdivision of the participants in several cohort studies into those
      above or below age 50 at entry shows that the increment in coronary heart disease risk per
      increment in total or LDL cholesterol level is nearly always substantially lower in the
      older group. In the Framingham Heart Study, the study with the most follow-up data beyond
      age 60, a 0.5 percent increment in the coronary heart disease incidence rate was estimated
      per 1 mg/dl increment in plasma cholesterol level -- about 60 percent of the increment seen
      in middle-aged men and women. However, the absolute numbers of potentially preventable
      coronary heart disease deaths, 80 percent of which occur after age 65, and myocardial
      infarctions attributable to high plasma cholesterol levels in Framingham and other
      observational studies appear to increase with increasing age.

      Previous clinical trials of cholesterol-lowering drugs have been weakened by their limited
      efficacy and acceptability to patients. In older patients, the administration of
      cholesterol-lowering drugs may be further complicated by interactions with drugs taken for
      other more pressing conditions. However, since the Food and Drug Administration approved the
      HMG CoA reductase inhibitor, lovastatin, in September 1987, the agent has been efficacious
      and well-tolerated by patients of all ages, and has been used increasingly widely.

      In 1986, an ad hoc committee of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's
      Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Lipid Metabolism Advisory Committee (AHLMAC) recommended
      a randomized clinical trial of cholesterol-lowering using an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor in
      the elderly. The recommendation was endorsed by the full AHLMAC and approved by the National
      Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council (NHLBAC) in May 1987. However, due to the high cost
      of such a trial and concerns about feasibility, an initiative for a two-year pilot study at
      five clinical centers was developed and approved by the NHLBAC in September 1988. The
      Request for Applications was released in February 1989 and awards made in July 1990.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      There were five clinical centers and a coordinating center in the pilot study. There were
      four pre-randomization visits at four to six week intervals. Subjects were eligible for
      inclusion if their LDL cholesterol levels remained above 120 mg/dl after the introduction of
      the American Heart Association Step 1 Diet at Visit 2. Subjects were randomized to diet plus
      a low dosage of lovastatin (20 mg), diet plus a high dosage of lovastatin (40 mg), or to
      diet plus a placebo. End points were changes in blood lipid levels. Data on other blood
      chemistry values, as well as quality-of-life measures and coronary heart disease morbidity
      and mortality, were also collected. LDL cholesterol levels were measured at clinic visits
      six and twelve weeks after randomization and at twelve week intervals thereafter. Serum
      alanine aminotransferase levels were measured at six week intervals to determine liver
      function and slit lamp exams were performed before and after study medication to detect
      lenticular opacities. Subjects were followed for a minimum of six months and a maximum of
      fifteen months.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 65 and older, with elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels
        between 159 and 221 mg/dl at entry.
