TITLE:
      Study to Investigate Effects of Antiischemic Drug Therapy in Silent Ischemia
SUMMARY:
      There is a lack of data on the prognostic importance of silent ischemia in totally
      asymptomatic subjects without history of coronary artery disease (CAD), and, particularly,
      on a possible benefit of medical therapy in such patients. SWISSI 1 therefore recruits
      totally asymptomatic subjects older than 40 years of age without any history of CAD but one
      cardiovascular risk factor with documented silent ischemia. Participants are randomized to
      open antianginal drug therapy and risk factor control versus only risk factor management and
      followed up for ≥ 10 years.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Although there is still controversy regarding why ischemic episodes are symptomatic in some
      patients and completely asymptomatic in others, it is now widely accepted that silent
      ischemia, like symptomatic episodes, negatively affects prognosis. Silent ischemia may occur
      in totally asymptomatic patients without (type I) or with a history (type II) of an ischemic
      cardiac event and coexists with symptomatic episodes in many patients (type III). However,
      there is a lack of data on the prognostic importance of silent ischemia in totally
      asymptomatic subjects without history of coronary artery disease (CAD), i.e. silent ischemia
      type I, and, particularly, on a possible benefit of medical therapy in such patients.
      Reasons lie in the difficulty to identify such patients and their expected low event rates
      implying that large patient populations and/or long follow-up periods would be necessary to
      come to definite conclusions. Still, to address this problem, we perform SWISSI 1 which
      includes totally asymptomatic subjects older than 40 years of age without any history of CAD
      but one cardiovascular risk factor with documented silent ischemia. They are randomized to
      open antianginal drug therapy and risk factor control versus only risk factor management and
      followed up for ≥ 10 years.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Documented silent myocardial ischemia type I

          -  At least one cardiovascular risk factor

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  History of cardiovascular disease
