TITLE:
      Pilot Study to Evaluate the Efficacy of Zidovudine in Preventing CD4+ Lymphocyte Decline in Patients With Primary HIV Infection. (One Treatment Arm Receives Placebo)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the safety and efficacy of early treatment with zidovudine for preventing a
      decline in CD4+ lymphocyte counts in patients with primary HIV infection. To determine the
      natural history of virologic and immunologic changes in primary HIV infection.

      Previous studies indicate that intervention with zidovudine during primary HIV infection
      could reduce the initial viral burden and subsequent decline in immune functions, and could
      prolong not only the time to development of AIDS but also the time to initiation of chronic
      antiretroviral therapy.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Previous studies indicate that intervention with zidovudine during primary HIV infection
      could reduce the initial viral burden and subsequent decline in immune functions, and could
      prolong not only the time to development of AIDS but also the time to initiation of chronic
      antiretroviral therapy.

      Patients are randomized to receive either zidovudine or placebo daily for 24 weeks. Patients
      are followed until development of an AIDS-related opportunistic infection or malignancy.
      After week 24, patients meeting standard prescribing criteria may start FDA-approved
      anti-HIV therapies. After study week 48, patients may co-enroll on another clinical trial to
      receive experimental therapy.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Medications for nausea, vomiting, analgesia, or anxiety.

        Patients must have:

          -  Asymptomatic or symptomatic primary HIV infection, plus one of the following two
             criteria:

               1. p24 antigenemia documented within 1 month prior to study entry and either HIV
                  enzyme immunoassay (IA) negative or HIV IA positive with Western blot
                  negative/indeterminate, within 1 month prior to study entry.

               2. Documented seroconversion within 1 month prior to study entry and Western blot
                  negative/indeterminate.

          -  Consent of parent or guardian if less than 18 years of age.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following condition are excluded:

          -  poor venous access.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Chronic steroid use.

          -  Immunomodulators.

          -  Myelosuppressive agents.

          -  Other antiretroviral agents or experimental therapies (NOTE: FDA-approved therapies
             permitted in patients who qualify after week 24; experimental therapies permitted
             after study week 48).
