TITLE:
      Evaluating the Link Between Neighborhood Environments and Obesity Among African American Women
SUMMARY:
      African American women have higher rates of obesity than women of any other racial or ethnic
      group in the United States. Obesity can have many causes, including genetic and
      environmental factors. This study will examine how neighborhood environments influence the
      occurrence of obesity among African American women.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Obesity, which leads to higher rates of diabetes, cancer, and heart disease, is an
      increasingly important public health problem. In 2000, over 78% of African American women
      were overweight, and over 50% were obese. Several factors can contribute to obesity,
      including genetics, diet, and environmental factors. Individuals who live in an environment
      in which it is difficult to maintain an active lifestyle are more prone to obesity. The
      Black Women's Health Study (BWHS) is an extensive long-term study that is gathering data
      from women across the country to examine the occurrence of various diseases among African
      American women. Using BWHS study data and specific information on participants'
      neighborhoods, including street layout and the presence of sidewalks, this study will
      determine if neighborhood environments influence the prevalence of obesity among African
      American women.

      This study will use already-collected data on physical activity and body mass index of BWHS
      study participants who live in New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago; there are no additional
      study visits specifically for this study. A transportation and urban planning expert will
      compile data regarding the pedestrian environment of neighborhoods in all three cities,
      including the nature and density of land use, proximity to parks, presence of sidewalks,
      speed and volume of traffic, and street structure. Census data regarding participants'
      socioeconomic status will also be collected.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Participating in the BWHS study

          -  Residing in New York, Los Angeles, or Chicago
