TITLE:
      Peer Navigator Education in Improving Survivorship Care in African American Breast Cancer Survivors
SUMMARY:
      This randomized clinical trial studies peer navigator education in improving survivorship
      care in African American breast cancer survivors. An educational intervention involving peer
      groups may help to improve the well-being and quality of life (QOL) in breast cancer
      survivors
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      PRIMARY OBJECTIVES:

      I. To evaluate the ability of peer navigation (PN) to improve understanding of survivorship
      care planning (SCP) at 6 months.

      II. To promote adherence to the SCP schedule of follow-up examinations at 12 months.

      SECONDARY OBJECTIVES:

      I. To evaluate the effect of PN on change from baseline in medical efficacy, preparedness
      for life as new survivor, and physical and health related QOL at 6 months.

      OUTLINE: PNs are trained on medical issues and resources, and SCP. Participants are then
      randomized to 1 of 2 treatment arms.

      ARM I: Participants receive 4 PN sessions tailored to their needs followed by a 6 month
      booster session and American Cancer Society (ACS) materials.

      ARM II: Participants receive ACS materials.

      After completion of study treatment, patients are followed up at 6 and 12 months.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  TRIAL SUBJECTS:

          -  Patient age 18 years or older who self-identifies as African-American

          -  In early survivorship phase, defined as being 1-12 months post completion of
             treatment for stage 0-3 breast cancer

          -  Receiving health care primarily through an health maintenance organization (HMO)

          -  Patients with metastatic cancer or a second primary cancer, because their medical
             characteristics (e.g. disease progression) are significantly different

          -  Breast cancer survivors (BCS) with other major disabling medical, psychiatric, or
             substance abuse conditions (e.g., anxiety, depression, alcohol/tobacco problems) will
             be excluded

          -  PEER NAVIGATORS:

          -  At least 25 years of age who self-identifies as African-American

          -  Previously participated in any type of research study

          -  Has at least high school education

          -  Has been diagnosed with breast cancer, currently in remission or eradicated

          -  Belongs to a breast cancer support group

          -  Has a valid driver's license

          -  Owns an operational vehicle

          -  Has access to a personal computer with internet access
