TITLE:
      Pulmonary Artery Denervation for Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
SUMMARY:
      Pulmonary hypertension is a rare condition that leads to right ventricular dysfunction and
      premature death. Only modest improvements of outcomes have been observed with the current
      available advanced specific drug therapy. Pulmonary hypertension advanced therapy is also
      expensive and leads to frequent adverse effects, sometimes serious. Results from a pilot
      study, the first-in-man experience of pulmonary artery denervation, demonstrated a clinical
      improvement in 13 patients with severe pulmonary hypertension despite optimal medical
      management. However this single non-randomized study requires confirmation.

      The investigators propose a prospective multi-center, randomized, single-blinded trial. Its
      main objective will be to assess, in patients with uncontrolled pulmonary hypertension
      despite optimal medical management, the efficacy of pulmonary artery denervation in reducing
      mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) at six months, compared to continued medical treatment
      following a simulated (sham) procedure.

      The principal evaluation criteria will be the mPAP change (in mm Hg) as measured by right
      heart catheterization.

      The study will run for 18 months and it will be necessary to recruit 50 patients.

      All adult patients (with the exception of pregnant women and individuals unable to receive
      an appropriate information and to give their free and informed consent) with uncontrolled
      pulmonary arterial hypertension despite optimal medical management will be invited to
      participate, in the absence of any exclusion criteria.

      The investigators will also measure changes in clinical, biological, echocardiographic and
      hemodynamic prognostic markers in both groups.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with pulmonary artery hypertension (group 1 of the Nice classification of
             pulmonary hypertension)

               -  Aged over 18 years old

               -  NYHA class III or IV

               -  Not controlled by optimal medical management as defined by:

                    -  dual therapy including a prostacyclin.

                    -  or dual therapy including an endothelin receptor antagonist and a

               -  5-phosphodiesterase inhibitors, in patients with contra-indication of
                  prostacyclin, poor tolerance to this treatment, prostacyclin derivative
                  treatment failure or patient refusal.

               -  Valid status in the social security system

               -  Signed informed consent

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patient eligible for pulmonary transplantation

          -  Pregnancy or breastfeeding

          -  Adults of the age of majority subject to guardianship court order or deprived of
             liberty

          -  Patient with history of radio frequency procedure

          -  Known heparin allergy
