TITLE:
      Management of Patent Ductus in Premature Infants
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the effects (up to one year of age) of indomethacin on the clinical course of
      patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) in premature infants (24 hours old or less) and to assess the
      relative merits of indomethacin and surgery in infants with persistent respiratory distress
      who were not treated early with indomethacin. Two concurrent trials were performed.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The incidence of patent ductus arteriosus is higher in premature infants than in full-term
      infants and is highest in premature infants who have respiratory distress syndrome. It is
      generally agreed that intervention in an asymptomatic infant with a small left-to-right
      shunt is unnecessary, since the patent ductus almost invariably closes spontaneously and
      thus does not require surgery. A few infants will demonstrate signs of a large shunt during
      the course of respiratory distress syndrome. Many of these infants will improve with medical
      management of congestive heart failure, but others require surgical closure. A third group
      of babies with respiratory distress have severe progressive pulmonary disease requiring
      ventilatory support. There was disagreement as to whether elimination of the patent ductus
      in these infants resulted in decreased mortality. A variety of therapeutic approaches was
      being used, and there was no convincing evidence of the superiority of one treatment over
      another.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Trial A was a randomized, double-blind trial in which indomethacin plus usual medical
      therapy was compared with a placebo plus medical therapy. Where this regimen was
      unsuccessful, the code was broken, and infants who received indomethacin were treated
      surgically. Infants who had received placebo in Trial A were entered, if there were no
      contraindications to indomethacin, into Trial B. In Trial B, infants were randomized to
      surgery or indomethacin therapy. Those in whom indomethacin treatment was unsuccessful were
      treated surgically. The Recruitment and Intervention Phase began in April 1979. All patients
      were enrolled by March 31, 1981, and followed for one year after enrollment.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Boy and girl premature infants with patent ductus arteriosus. Birth weight of 1,750 grams
        or less. Admitted to participating institution within first 24 hours of life.
