TITLE:
      Study of Diagnosis and Pathophysiology of Pulmonary Embolism (APE 1 Trial)
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to

        -  investigate which method and criterion for diagnosing pulmonary embolism is the best
           and

        -  determine the relationship between blood vessel constriction and clot size in patients
           developing heart failure
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      INTRODUCTION This project assesses both scintigraphic diagnosis and the pathophysiology of
      right heart strain in acute pulmonary embolism. The primary purposes are to validate various
      scintigraphic methods with pulmonary angiography as the standard of reference (purpose A).
      Furthermore, this project examines the relative contributions of 1) vascular obstruction, 2)
      vasoactive mediators, and 3) co-morbidity to the generation of right heart strain (purpose
      B).

      BACKGROUND FOR PURPOSE A Acute pulmonary embolism is a life threatening condition. Early
      intervention can be lifesaving but treatment is associated with severe side effects. Thus,
      establishing accurate diagnosis is necessary. Clinical presentation and physical examination
      have proven insufficient for this purpose. This is also true for basic diagnostic
      investigations, e.g. electrocardiography, arterial blood gas analysis and chest x-ray, which
      are considered standard tests in patients with symptoms consistent with cardiopulmonary
      disease.

      For several decades lung scintigraphy has been considered a cornerstone in the diagnosis of
      acute pulmonary embolism. Planar two-dimensional images of the pulmonary perfusion are
      obtained using a gamma camera after intravenous injection of radiolabelled microparticles,
      depicting perfusion defects caused by e.g. a pulmonary embolus. Similarly, ventilatory
      function can be assessed two-dimensionally by planar scintigraphic imaging following
      inhalation of a radioactive gas or aerosol. Lung scintigraphy has certain limitations,
      primarily related to image interpretation. The PIOPED criteria, based on the combined
      ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy, have gained global acceptance, but are often
      inconclusive and give rise to misunderstandings. A different set of interpretation criteria,
      provided by the PISA-PED study group, are based solely on perfusion imaging. Opposite the
      PIOPED criteria, PISA-PED criteria are always conclusive and exhibits both high sensitivity
      and specificity. The latter have, however, not gained the same widespread acceptance as the
      PIOPED criteria. It remains uncertain which set of criteria is the better to confirm or
      exclude the diagnosis of acute pulmonary. A prospective trial evaluating both PIOPED
      criteria (original and revised) and PISA-PED criteria against a valid standard of reference
      therefore seems appropriate.

      The more resource demanding single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) has recently
      been subject to renewed interest in the diagnosis of acute pulmonary embolism, but it
      remains unclear whether this technique offers additional information compared to
      conventional planar imaging. SPECT offers three-dimensional images, but otherwise the
      technique is similar to the methods described for planar images. Combining the PISA-PED
      criteria and SPECT imaging has not yet been tested in a prospective trial, but it seems
      highly relevant.

      Since the diagnosis is often suspected several times in the same patient, the ability to
      distinguish acute and chronic changes in the scintigrams are essential. It is, however,
      unclear to what extend and how fast the scintigraphic changes resolve. This has great
      implications in scintigraphic control of patients recovering from acute pulmonary embolism.

      A trial regarding the statements above requires a reliable method to test whether the
      patient is suffering from acute pulmonary embolism or not: a standard of reference.
      Pulmonary angiography is traditionally conceived as the standard of reference in acute
      pulmonary embolism, but only a few newer studies employ this technique.

      BACKGROUND FOR PURPOSE B Right heart strain is a common finding in acute pulmonary embolism.
      It is a result of the sudden increase in pressure in the pulmonary circulation.
      Ultrasonographic examination of the heart by echocardiography is suitable to demonstrate
      this condition and this finding in a patient with acute pulmonary embolism is associated
      with a considerably worse prognosis. The degree of right heart strain is not exclusively
      determined by extension or size of the embolus. There is substantial evidence of the
      influence of both co-morbidity and the release of vasoactive mediators on the extend of
      right heart strain. The exact interplay between these three factors is not completely
      understood in humans. Albeit, this can have significant implications on therapy, since
      pharmacological manipulation of vascular tone in the pulmonary circulation is possible. This
      treatment is, however, not without risk, and no well-designed study has yet addressed these
      issues in patients with acute pulmonary embolism. Several case reports on successful
      treatment with vasodilation, e.g. with inhaled nitric oxide, have been published. A more
      profound understanding of the etiology of acute right heart failure in acute pulmonary
      embolism is therefore desirable. What is the individual contribution of 1) clot burden, 2)
      release of vasoactive mediators, and 3) co-morbidity?

      Recently, acute pulmonary embolism has been divided into three categories depending on
      clinical presentation and echocardiographic findings: 1) massive; in which the patient
      suffers from cardiac arrest or cardiogenic shock. Most authorities agree that these patients
      should be treated with fibrinolytic agents. 2) Non-massive; with no signs of shock or right
      heart strain. In these patients there is no indication for fibrinolytic agents. 3)
      Sub-massive; with no manifestations of shock but echocardiographic findings consistent with
      right heart strain. The indication for fibrinolytic treatment in this last group is
      unresolved. This study will address whether simple methods, e.g. peripheral blood sampling
      and perfusion scintigraphy can determine the primary mechanism in the generation of right
      heart strain in the individual patient.

      A later (not yet planned) intervention study based on the abovementioned knowledge could
      then address the following question: Should the patient with sub-massive pulmonary embolism
      receive treatment with fibrinolytic agents (in the case of major clot burden and minor
      degree of pulmonary vasoconstriction) or vasodilators (minor clot burden, major degree of
      pulmonary vasoconstriction)?
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Referred from clinical departments at Odense University Hospital

          -  Referred to the Departments of Nuclear Medicine or Radiology for diagnostic
             evaluation of suspected pulmonary embolism

          -  Referred for lung scintigraphy, spiral computer tomography, or pulmonary angiography

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Age below 18

          -  Contrast allergy

          -  Pregnancy

          -  S-Creatinine above 200 micromol/L

          -  Metformin treatment

          -  Fibrinolytic or surgical therapy between examinations

          -  No informed consent

          -  Withdrawn consent

          -  Failed logistics (more than 24 hours between examinations)

          -  No conclusive pulmonary angiography
