TITLE:
      Active Immunization of HIV-1 Infected, Pregnant Women With CD4 Lymphocyte Counts >= 400/mm3: A Phase I Study of Safety and Immunogenicity of VaxSyn Recombinant gp160 (NOTE: Some Patients Receive Placebo)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the safety of gp160 vaccine (VaxSyn) in HIV-1 infected pregnant women with CD4
      counts >= 400 cells/mm3. To evaluate the immunogenicity of this vaccine in pregnant women
      and the passive acquisition of vaccine-specific antibody in their infants.

      Evidence suggests that an advanced stage of disease with high plasma viremia is associated
      with increased transmission of HIV-1 to the fetus. Slowing the progression of disease,
      reducing the titer of virus in plasma, and increasing the titer of epitope-specific antibody
      are potentially attainable goals through active immunization of the mother during pregnancy.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Evidence suggests that an advanced stage of disease with high plasma viremia is associated
      with increased transmission of HIV-1 to the fetus. Slowing the progression of disease,
      reducing the titer of virus in plasma, and increasing the titer of epitope-specific antibody
      are potentially attainable goals through active immunization of the mother during pregnancy.

      Pregnant women are randomized to receive an initial injection of VaxSyn or alum placebo
      between week 16 and week 24 of gestation, followed by monthly booster injections concluding
      at the end of pregnancy, for a total of five injections. Patients may have optional booster
      immunizations (vaccine or placebo) at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after delivery. Mothers and
      infants are followed through 18 months after delivery.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  AZT.

          -  Acyclovir.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV-1 infection.

          -  CD4 count >= 400 cells/mm3.

          -  No AIDS-defining illness or other systemic manifestations related to HIV (other than
             generalized lymphadenopathy).

          -  HIV p24 < 30 pg/ml.

          -  Proven pregnancy in the 16th to 24th week of gestation at study entry, with no
             special obstetrical risks.

          -  Concurrent AZT therapy is permitted.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms and conditions are excluded:

          -  Known hypersensitivity to a component of the vaccine.

          -  Evidence of fetal abnormality on ultrasound.

          -  Evidence of maternal risk factors including insulin-dependent diabetes, moderate to
             severe hypertension, repeated fetal wastage (> 3), Rh-sensitization or other blood
             group alloimmunization, severe renal disease, previous infants with malformations or
             other factors that obstetrically are judged to constitute a special risk of
             spontaneous abortion or premature birth.

          -  Active syphilis.

          -  Hepatitis B surface antigen positive.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Antiretroviral or immunomodulating agent other than AZT during the pregnancy.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Antiretroviral or immunomodulating agent other than AZT within 90 days prior to study
             entry.

        Current use of illicit drugs or known chronic alcohol use.
