TITLE:
      Influence of CPB Temperature on CABG Morbidity
SUMMARY:
      To compare three accepted modes of myocardial preservation, warm, tepid, and cold blood
      cardioplegia, coinciding with normothermic (37 degrees centigrade), tepid (32 degrees
      centigrade) and hypothermic (8 to 10 degrees centigrade) cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) to
      define differences in neurologic function in coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      A pilot study of warm versus cold perfusion and preservation was completed in 32 patients
      prior to the ongoing study. The findings of the pilot study showed 53 percent of patients
      had evidence of new neurologic disturbance at postoperative day four. Only the neurologic
      dysfunction could be correlated with warm versus cold perfusion (37.5 percent warm versus 75
      percent cold, P less than 0.05). The changes in neurologic function had abated or clearly
      improved by one month of follow-up, and the distinction in neurologic dysfunction grading
      was no longer apparent between the two groups.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Patients were randomly assigned to cold, tepid, or warm blood cardioplegia, coinciding with
      normothermic, tepid, and hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass. All patients received a
      standard anesthetic protocol combining narcotic and inhalational anesthesia. Each patient
      entering the study had extensive clinical data collected prospectively incorporating most
      aspects of measurable determinants related to myocardial preservation. Additionally,
      neurologic tests were performed by a blinded neurologist and rated by an objective scoring
      system, the Mathew scale. The studies were performed preoperatively, on the third or fourth
      postoperative day, and at one month following surgery. Hematologic data were measured for
      fibrinolytic potential.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients, referred for elective or urgent coronary revascularization, not having ongoing
        angina instability, requiring three or more bypass grafts, and under 70 years of age.
