TITLE:
      Study of Melatonin: Sleep Problems in Alzheimer's Disease
SUMMARY:
      This protocol is a multicenter clinical trial of melatonin for sleep disturbances associated
      with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Frequent nocturnal awakening is a common behavioral symptom
      of AD. Nighttime wandering and agitated behavior may result in injuries and sleep disruption
      for caregivers. Alternatives are sorely needed to the currently available sleep medications
      that have marginal efficacy and serious side effects. Melatonin is a naturally occurring
      hormone secreted by the pineal gland. It has soporific effects with oral administration and
      is well tolerated. It enhances sleep in normal older people. Melatonin also may help sleep
      disturbances associated with AD; however, this remains to be proven.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      In Alzheimer's disease , sleep disruption is one of the most common behavioral problems,
      occurring in 45 percent of patients. These nocturnal awakenings and agitation lead to
      considerable burden for caregivers and frequently lead families to the decision of nursing
      home placement. The proposed study is a randomized, double blind, parallel group, placebo
      controlled, clinical trial. Placebo will be compared with two doses of melatonin: a 2.5 mg,
      slow- release preparation and a 10 mg immediate release preparation. One hundred and fifty
      community-residing AD patients with disrupted sleep will be recruited. Included subjects
      will meet NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for probable AD. Prior to study entry, disrupted sleep will
      be documented by clinical history and by 1 to 2 weeks of recording using wrist activity
      monitors. The treatment period will last 8 weeks. Rest/activity patterns will be recorded by
      wrist activity monitors. The primary outcome measure will be the change in nocturnal sleep
      time from baseline to the end of the treatment phase.

      Other outcomes also will be examined, including the time awake after sleep onset, sleep
      latency, sleep efficiency, daytime agitation, and changes in cognition. The relative
      effectiveness of high and low dose melatonin will be assessed. Adverse events and side
      effects will be compared by treatment. This study should provide the data necessary to
      determine whether melatonin is a safe and effective treatment for disrupted sleep associated
      with AD.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients must meet NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for probable Alzheimer's disease (AD).
             Patients must have disrupted sleep, documented by clinical history and by 1 to 2
             weeks of recording using wrist activity monitors.

          -  A diagnosis of probable AD.

          -  MMSE score 0-26.

          -  Hachinski Ischemia Scale score less than or equal to 4.

          -  A 2-week history of two or more sleep disorder behaviors, occurring at least once
             weekly, as reported by the caregiver on the Sleep Disorder Inventory.

          -  CT or MRI since the onset of memory problems showing no more than one lacunar infarct
             in a non-strategic area and no clinical events suggestive of stroke or other
             intracranial disease since the CT or MRI.

          -  Physically acceptable for study as confirmed by medical history and exam, clinical
             laboratory results, and EKG.

          -  Actigraph evidence of a mean nocturnal sleep time of less than 7 hours per night (at
             least 5 nights of complete actigraph data must be collected over a single week.

          -  Stable home situation with no planned move during the 13-week investigational period.

          -  Residing with responsible spouse, family member, or professional caregiver who is
             present during the night and will agree to assume the role of the principal caregiver
             for the 13-week protocol, including arranging transport for the patient to and from
             the investigators' clinic, answering questions regarding the patient's condition, and
             assuming responsibility for medication and actigraph procedures.

          -  Ability to ingest oral medication and participate in all scheduled evaluations.

          -  Six grades of education or work history sufficient to exclude mental retardation.

          -  55 years of age or older.

          -  Hamilton Depression Rating Scale score of 15 or less.

          -  Stable medication (dose and type) for non-excluded concurrent medical conditions for
             4 weeks prior to the screening visit.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Sleep disturbance is acute (within the last 2 weeks).

          -  Sleep disturbance is associated with an acute illness with delirium.

          -  Clinically significant movement disorder that would interfere with the actigraph
             readings.

          -  Not having a mobile upper extremity to which to attach an actigraph.

          -  Severe agitation.

          -  Pain syndrome affecting sleep.

          -  Unstable medical condition.

          -  Use of investigational or unapproved medications within 4 weeks of the screening
             visit.

          -  Patient unwilling to maintain caffeine abstinence after 2:00 pm for the duration of
             the protocol.

          -  Patient unwilling to comply with the maximum limit of two alcoholic drinks per day,
             and only one alcoholic drink after 6:00 pm for the duration of the protocol.

          -  Use of melatonin within 2 weeks of screening visit.

          -  Clinically significant abnormal laboratory findings that have not been approved by
             the Project Director.

          -  Residing in a facility without a consistent caregiver present during the night who
             can function as the primary informant.

          -  Caregiver deemed too unreliable to supervise the wearing of the actigraph, to
             maintain the sleep diary, or to bring the patient to the scheduled visits.

          -  Autoimmune disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis and polymyalgia rheumatica.
