TITLE:
      Role of Metabolites in Nicotine Dependence (3) - 6
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine the effects of various doses of ondansetron
      transdermal nicotine replacement on tobacco withdrawal symptoms.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Previous studies have shown that cotinine, a metabolite of nicotine, antagonizes the
      beneficial effects of the nicotine patch in redugin withdrawal symptoms. Studies have also
      shown that cotinine enhances serotonin levels. This study examined the effects of several
      doses of a 5HT3 antagonist, ondanstron, in combination with the nicotine patch. This
      medication has been observed to reduce nicotine withdrawal symptoms in rats. These effects
      were compared to the nicotine patch alone. The results of this study produced some modest
      effects showing that the 8mg dose of ondansetron suppressed tobacco withdrawal symptoms to a
      greater extent than the nicotine patch alone.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Male/Female subjects ages 21-45 years inclusive, with a smoking history of at least 15
        cigarettes daily (greater than or equal to 50) for at least 1 yr. Subject is in good
        health as verified by medical history, screening examination, and screening laboratory
        tests as outlined above. Subject has provided written informed consent to participate in
        the study and is motivated to stop smoking. Subject has experienced at least 4 withdrawal
        symptoms upon abstinence.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        History of myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, sustained or episodic cardiac
        arrhythmias, symptomatic peripheral vascular disease, current peptic ulcer disease or any
        other medical condition which the physician investigator deems inappropriate for subject
        participation. Insulin-dependent diabetes. Pregnant or lactating, or not using adequate
        birth control methods. Requirement of any form of regular psychotropic medication
        (antidepressants, antipsychotics, or anxiolytics) and recent psychiatric history (less
        than 1yr). Chronic use of systemic steroids or antihistamines. Abuse of alcohol or any
        other recreational or prescription drug (more than 3 drinks per day or 21 drinks per wk).
        use of any other nicotine products, including smokeless tobacco, cigars and nicotine
        replacement products. Inability to fulfill all scheduled visits and examination procedures
        throughout the study period. History of schizophrenia or manic depressive disorder. Recent
        history of other psychiatric illness (less than 1yr since last episode of major depressive
        episode).
