TITLE:
      Memory Aid - Working Memory Training in Patients With Mild Cognitive Impairment.
SUMMARY:
      Background:

      Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is a condition characterized by memory problems more severe
      than normal cognitive changes due to old age, and less severe than dementia. Reduced working
      memory (WM) is regarded as one of the core symptoms of an MCI-condition. Recent studies have
      indicated that WM can be improved trough computer based training.

      Objectives:

      The objective of the study is to evaluate if working memory training is effective in
      improving working memory in elderly MCI-patients. Further, to evaluate if cognitive training
      relates to structural changes in the white and gray matter of the brain, assessed by
      structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Cognitive phenotypes related to memory impairment and
      progression to dementia will also be investigated.

      Patients and Methods:

      The proposed study is a blinded, randomized and controlled trail that will include 90
      elderly patients from a Memory Clinic diagnosed with MCI. The groups will be randomized to
      either training or a placebo version. The intervention is computerized working memory
      training performed for 45 minutes over 25 sessions. Neuropsychological assessment and
      structural MRI will be performed before, 6 and 12 months after training.

      Relevance:

      Currently there is no known treatment available for mild memory impairment/MCI, and few
      studies on specific cognitive training in MCI-patients have been performed. The proposed
      study has received funding from a Norwegian Health Region. If computer based training
      results in positive changes to memory functions in MCI patients this may represent a new,
      cost-effective treatment. Secondly, evaluation of training induced structural changes to
      grey or white matter may improve our understanding of the mechanisms behind effective
      cognitive interventions in MCI patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who meet the Peterson diagnostic criteria of MCI:

               1. memory complaints (preferably confirmed by an informant).

               2. memory impairment according to age and education.

               3. preserved general cognitive function.

               4. intact activities of daily living, absence of dementia.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  head trauma with post-traumatic loss of conscience for 30 minutes during lifespan.

          -  loss of senses (blindness, deafness).

          -  photo-sensitive epilepsy.

          -  unsuitability for Magnetic Resonance Imaging-examination due to metal foreign bodies
             or severe claustrophobia.

          -  drug and/or alcohol abuse.
