TITLE:
      Lung Health Study II
SUMMARY:
      To determine if participants with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, who were assigned
      to inhaled corticosteroids had a lower rate of decline in lung function and lower incidence
      of respiratory morbidity compared to participants assigned to placebo.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the fourth leading cause of death in the
      United States and a major cause of morbidity, is a spectrum of chronic lung diseases
      including clinical diagnoses of chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and combinations of both.
      Varying degrees of bronchoreactivity occur over the entire spectrum. Asthma and COPD have
      many features in common. Distinction is usually dependent on clinical features and clinical
      course. The diagnosis of asthma will not exclude a patient from the designation of COPD for
      this study, although criteria for exclusion include recent (within six months) use of
      inhaled or oral steroid with the intent of excluding most of those who are clearly
      predominantly bronchospastic. The morbid anatomy of COPD is well described and includes many
      features of acute and chronic inflammation. There is well supported evidence in the
      literature that this inflammatory process may be an important pathogenetic mechanism in the
      development of emphysema. On this basis, the rationale for the use of corticosteroids is
      well justified. There are various published studies suggesting that inhaled steroids reduce
      bronchial lavage markers of inflammation, variously influence short-term bronchial
      hyperreactivity, improve lung function acutely or short-term, and slow rate of decline in
      lung function. Most studies have asked for improvement rather than stability. However,
      despite the studies which do not support these contentions and the lack of long-term
      information, inhaled steroids in COPD are becoming widely used in clinical practice. It was
      the intent of this clinical trial to assess the long-term efficacy of this treatment before
      such therapy became an accepted community practice, making it impractical or impossible to
      conduct a clinical trial.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Subjects were recruited from the Lung Health Study I and randomized to 1200 micrograms of
      triamcinolone in daily divided doses or to placebo. Pulmonary function was evaluated every
      six months. Bronchial activity was tested at baseline, at nine months, and at
      three-and-a-half years using a methacholine inhalation challenge. Mean duration of follow-up
      was 40 months. The primary outcome measure was the rate of decline in pulmonary function as
      assessed by the post-bronchodilator FEV1 value. Other outcome measures included death,
      respiratory symptoms, quality of life, side-effects and toxicity, adherence, bronchial
      hyperreactivity, atopic status, and smoking status. Recruitment was initiated in November
      1994 and ended November 28, 1995 to allow 3.5 to 4.5 years of follow-up through April, 1999.

      The investigators initiated a dose monitor (puff counter) protocol at nine of the centers
      among the fair to satisfactory compliers (4 to 9 puffs versus the ideal of 12 puffs per day)
      to test whether a memory aid would enhance inhaler compliance. Consenting participants were
      randomized to Group 1 who could see the display on the puff counter for 12 months or to
      Group 2 who had no counter for three months, a counter that recorded but did not display for
      three months, and a counter with display for six months.

      There were a bone densitometry and adrenal suppression ancillary studies, funded by
      Rhone-Poulenc-Rorer, to assess the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on bone density and
      adrenal function.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 40 to 69, with FEV1/FVC 70 percent and FEV1 that was 30 to 90 percent
        predicted.
