TITLE:
      Drug Treatment for Alcoholics With Bipolar Disorder
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to test the effectiveness of sodium valproate (Depacon) in
      treating individuals with alcohol dependence and comorbid bipolar disorder.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The aim of this study is to test the mood stabilizer, anticonvulsant, sodium valproate in
      individuals with alcohol dependence and bipolar disorder, in a double-blind,
      placebo-controlled, and randomized trial of 6 months duration. All subjects are treated with
      treatment as usual, which include lithium carbonate and individual dual recovery counseling
      and are randomized to either sodium valproate or placebo.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets the criteria for alcohol dependence with comorbid bipolar disorder.

          -  Agreement to participate in outpatient treatment.

          -  Ability to tolerate lithium carbonate and be randomized to receive sodium valproate
             or placebo.

          -  Stable living situation.

          -  Ability to provide informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Psychiatric conditions including schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, any
             non-bipolar psychotic disorder, unipolar major depression, mental retardation, or
             signs of impaired cognitive functioning.

          -  Neurological conditions including epilepsy, history of brain injury, encephalitis, or
             any organic brain syndrome or focally abnormal electroencephalographic examination.

          -  Medical conditions including severe cardiac, liver, kidney, endocrine, hematologic,
             other impairing or unstable medical condition or impending surgery.

          -  Persistent elevation of liver function enzymes indicating active liver disease.

          -  Pregnancy or not using an acceptable contraceptive method.

          -  Inability to read or understand study forms; agree to informed consent.

          -  Impending incarceration or a mandate to attend treatment by the legal system for an
             alcohol use disorder.

          -  The presence of either/or cocaine dependence, opioid dependence, and intravenous drug
             use.
