TITLE:
      A Registry of Tuberculosis Cases in the CPCRA
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: To estimate the proportion of tuberculosis patients in the CPCRA who have
      drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) and to describe the patterns of drug resistance.

      SECONDARY: To compare drug resistance data on the Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates of
      HIV-infected patients to those of HIV-uninfected patients who are being followed in the
      CPCRA. To assess the relationship of resistance data with geographic, demographic, and HIV
      and TB risk factor information.

      Geographic areas and demographic subgroups affected by the TB epidemic appear to be
      congruent and associated with the concurrent HIV epidemic. The total number of CPCRA
      patients who will develop, or who have experienced, confirmed TB is unknown. It is critical
      to determine the depth and breadth of the current problem of drug-resistant TB.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Geographic areas and demographic subgroups affected by the TB epidemic appear to be
      congruent and associated with the concurrent HIV epidemic. The total number of CPCRA
      patients who will develop, or who have experienced, confirmed TB is unknown. It is critical
      to determine the depth and breadth of the current problem of drug-resistant TB.

      For both retrospective and prospective components of the study, demographic, geographic, HIV
      and TB risk factor information will be collected on CPCRA patients with confirmed pulmonary
      or extrapulmonary TB. Mycobacterial culture results will be recorded. Retrospective data
      will be collected on CPCRA patients with confirmed tuberculosis who have been diagnosed
      since January 1992 until the time of site registration. Prospective data will be collected
      on CPCRA patients with confirmed tuberculosis diagnosed during the period of 1 to 2 years
      following site registration.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients must meet the following criteria:

          -  CPCRA patients with confirmed pulmonary or extrapulmonary TB. Confirmed clinical TB
             requires a positive culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

        NOTE:

          -  There is no requirement that patients have HIV infection.
