TITLE:
      A Study of Psychosocial and Behavioral Determinants of Differential Rates of Participant Compliance in CPCRA Protocols
SUMMARY:
      To examine, in patients enrolled in protocols CPCRA 006 and/or 007, the relationship between
      patient compliance and demographic, psychosocial, and lifestyle characteristics and Health
      Belief Model premises (i.e., patient's perception of susceptibility to and severity of
      disease and perception of benefits and barriers to a particular treatment) in order to
      design more effective intervention protocols.

      Patient noncompliance can influence the statistical findings of a clinical study, possibly
      resulting in an incorrect assessment of the effects of the investigational therapeutic
      agent. Since the special populations targeted by the CPCRA for inclusion in HIV-related
      clinical research do not typify those traditionally included in clinical trials or
      compliance research, it is necessary to elucidate and examine the special needs of these
      populations and to determine the extent to which these needs manifest themselves as
      potential barriers to protocol compliance.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Patient noncompliance can influence the statistical findings of a clinical study, possibly
      resulting in an incorrect assessment of the effects of the investigational therapeutic
      agent. Since the special populations targeted by the CPCRA for inclusion in HIV-related
      clinical research do not typify those traditionally included in clinical trials or
      compliance research, it is necessary to elucidate and examine the special needs of these
      populations and to determine the extent to which these needs manifest themselves as
      potential barriers to protocol compliance.

      Patients who are enrolled on protocols CPCRA 006 and/or 007 are given a baseline
      questionnaire to complete during the enrollment visit for the qualifying treatment protocol.
      The survey concerns the patient's work, primary language, support systems, residence status,
      perception of disease and treatments, and substance use. At 4-month follow-up visits,
      patients are asked to complete a self-report questionnaire, which assesses the patient's
      perceptions of difficulties in protocol compliance requirements, clinic/office visits, and
      health beliefs. The duration of patients on this study will be defined by the qualifying
      protocol requirements.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients must meet the following criteria:

          -  New enrollment on CPCRA 006 or CPCRA 007.

          -  Life expectancy of at least 6 months.

          -  Willing and able, in clinician's opinion, to comply with treatment and clinical
             management.

          -  Able to read and write English or Spanish.

          -  Consent of parent of guardian for patients under 18 years.
