TITLE:
      PACIFIC: Providing Adults Collaborative Interventions For Ideal Changes
SUMMARY:
      The objective of this proposed study is to collect initial efficacy data on ROC and ROC +
      BWL compared to an attentional control (AC) and to BWL.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The investigators have developed a new model for the treatment of obesity, called Regulation
      of Cues (ROC), which is based on Schachter's Externality Theory. The ROC program targets two
      theorized mechanisms for overeating in Schachter's Theory; decreased sensitivity to
      appetitive cues and increased sensitivity to external food cues. Considering that BWL has
      merit for some people, but fails to facilitate maintenance, this study will compare ROC,
      BWL, ROC+BWL combined and an attentional control (AC). The investigators will recruit
      overweight/obese adults and will assess them at baseline, mid-treatment (month 6),
      post-treatment (month 12), mid-follow-up (month 18) and follow-up (month 24). Assessments
      will include body mass index (BMI), body composition, and binge eating over the course of
      treatment and follow-up. This study will contribute to the study of basic behavioral
      mechanisms and food intake, could provide a novel model for the treatment of obesity, and
      could inform clinical decision making regarding obesity treatment.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      1. All participants will be between the ages of 18-55 meeting criteria for overweight,
             with a BMI between 25 and 45.

          2. Participants will provide written informed consent for study participation.

          3. Participants will possess English language skills at the 5th grade reading level.

          4. Participants will be free of major medical conditions such as a recent history of
             coronary heart disease; recent history of myocardial infarction; recent symptoms of
             angina, diabetes, recent stroke, orthopedic problems that would limit activity during
             the following twelve months; or any other serious medical condition that would make
             physical activity unsafe.

          5. Participants will not have bulimia or anorexia, significant cognitive impairment, a
             known psychotic disorder, or unstable psychiatric illness (e.g., recent psychiatric
             hospitalization, acute suicidal ideation) as derived from their intake interview and
             questionnaires.

          6. Participants will not be moving out of the San Diego area for the duration of their
             study enrollment (24 months).

          7. Participants will not be pregnant, planning to get pregnant in the 2 year study
             period or lactating.

          8. Participants will not be taking medication for weight loss or that may impair
             physical activity tolerance or performance.

          9. Participants with medical or psychological problems, or taking medications that could
             make adherence with the study protocol difficult or dangerous will not be included.
