TITLE:
      Thalidomide for Treatment of Oral and Esophageal Aphthous Ulcers and HIV Viremia in Patients With HIV Infection
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: To evaluate the effectiveness and safety of thalidomide for treatment of oral and
      esophageal aphthous ulcers (those unrelated to a known infection or malignancy) in patients
      with advanced HIV disease. To evaluate the effect of thalidomide on HIV load in this patient
      population. Per 06/28/94 amendment, to evaluate the effectiveness of thalidomide in
      preventing recurrences in patients whose aphthae completely heal at the end of acute
      treatment.

      SECONDARY: To evaluate the effect of thalidomide on blood tumor necrosis factor (TNF) levels
      and to obtain pharmacokinetic data on the drug. Per 06/28/94 amendment, to evaluate the
      safety of thalidomide. Per 05/10/95 amendment, to explore in a substudy the effects of
      thalidomide on idiopathic genital aphthous ulcers in HIV-infected women.

      Aphthous ulcers of the mouth or esophagus can interfere with eating, resulting in
      malnutrition and wasting. Thalidomide has been proposed as an effective therapy for severe
      forms of aphthous ulceration in AIDS patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Aphthous ulcers of the mouth or esophagus can interfere with eating, resulting in
      malnutrition and wasting. Thalidomide has been proposed as an effective therapy for severe
      forms of aphthous ulceration in AIDS patients.

      Patients are randomized to receive 4 weeks of either thalidomide or placebo orally,
      administered once daily. Patients are followed weekly. Complete responders after 4 weeks of
      acute treatment enter a 24-week maintenance phase. A pharmacokinetic substudy will be
      included.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Anti-HIV therapy provided therapy has remained constant in the 4 weeks prior to study
             entry.

          -  Narcotic analgesia after the first week of treatment ONLY IF the patient is not
             experiencing somnolence.

        Patients must have:

          -  Documented HIV infection or AIDS.

          -  Biopsy-confirmed aphthous ulceration of the mouth or esophagus lasting at least 2
             weeks.

          -  Negative culture of ulcer for Herpes simplex.

          -  En face diameter of >= 5 mm for largest aphthous ulcer.

          -  Life expectancy of at least 3 months.

        NOTE:

          -  This study is approved for prisoner participation.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Known allergy to thalidomide.

          -  Grade 2 or worse bilateral peripheral neuropathy.

        EXCLUDED FOR MAINTENANCE PHASE:

          -  Toxicity other than somnolence in acute phase that required discontinuation of drug.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Acute therapy for opportunistic infection.

          -  ddC.

          -  Pentoxifylline.

          -  Methotrexate, trimetrexate, antineoplastic alkylating agents.

          -  Other putative immunomodulators.

          -  CNS depressants and/or medications with sedative or hypnotic effect.

          -  Systemic and/or oral topical corticosteroids.

          -  Systemic chemotherapy for Kaposi's sarcoma or other malignancies.

          -  Compounded antibacterial mouthwashes containing anti-infective agents (such as
             doxycycline, minocycline, tetracycline, or nystatin).

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Radiation to head and/or neck.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of grade 2 or worse bilateral peripheral neuropathy.

          -  Change in anti-HIV therapy within 4 weeks prior to study entry.

          -  Prior enrollment in ACTG 251 or prior treatment of aphthous ulcers with thalidomide.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Systemic and/or oral topical corticosteroids within 1 week prior to first set of
             bloods drawn.

          -  Other putative immunomodulators within 2 weeks prior to study entry.

          -  Prior thalidomide for aphthous ulcers.
