TITLE:
      Safety and Feasibility of Endovascular Cooling Device in Patients With Hypothermic Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
SUMMARY:
      Hypothermic resuscitation is proven to be benefit to the cardiac origin cardiac arrest
      patients for it improve brain recovery dramatically. However, traditional cooling devices
      and methods, most external cooling methods, include ice blanket, cooling helmet, or ice
      packing lower the body temperature slowly or inefficiently which make many emergency
      physicians hesitate to perform hypothermic resuscitation. To improve and promote the
      practice of hypothermia resuscitation, more efficient temperature control method is
      necessary. We conduct this clinical trial to evaluate the safety and feasibility of internal
      cooling catheter and temperature regulatory device, which is approved by FDA in neurologic
      ICU for temperature control, in the cardiac arrest patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      We recruited successful resuscitated nontraumatic cardiac arrest adult patients in the
      emergency department to evaluate the safety and feasibility of application those invasive
      internal temperature regulator devices. Internal cooling catheter, "ICY" , and thermal
      regulator device, "Coolguard 2000" are applied to the patients from femoral vein. WE
      definite 4 stages according to the temperature during the clinical trial: "The Cooling
      Phase", "Hypothermia phase", "Rewarming phase", and "Postrewarming phase". The temperature
      is lowed or elevated by the rate 0.5C/hr during the Cooling and Rewarming Phase, and it is
      maintained 33 +/- 1 C during hypothermia phase for 12 hours according to the comment of
      ACLS. To understand the safety and feasibility, regular blood sampling, bedside EEG and
      vital monitors, and special sheets are designed to document the every reasons, time points
      or every clinical events during hypothermia therapy. The patients is observed until
      rewarming finish for 48 hours or till death if expired during post-resuscitation hypothermia
      therapy.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Non-traumatic collapsed patients, whose pulsation continues and persists more than 5
             minutes after return of spontaneous circulation from cardiopulmonary resuscitation
             and consciousness level is less than GCS 5 points.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  1. Age > 78 y/o or < 18 y/o 2. Core temperature< 34℃or > 38 ℃ after resuscitation 3.
             Pregnancy 4. Underline terminal malignancy disorder or refuse aggressive treatment
             cancer patient 5. Massive bleeding, known coagulopathy, or received regular
             anticoagulant medication 6. Persisted hypotension ( mean arterial BP < 60 mmHg) after
             resuscitation even under inotropic agents 7. No bed available in ICU
