TITLE:
      Antifolate Effectiveness in Arthritis
SUMMARY:
      This study looks at how the arthritis drug methotrexate works in low doses to treat
      rheumatoid arthritis. (High doses of methotrexate are used to treat some types of cancer.)
      Methotrexate blocks the action of the B-vitamin known as folic acid. We are studying the
      biochemical reactions affected by this vitamin because we think that blocking many of these
      reactions may be necessary for methotrexate to work in treating rheumatoid arthritis.
      Through these studies, we hope to gain a better understanding of how this drug and related
      drugs work as treatments for arthritis.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Low-dose methotrexate therapy suppresses autoimmune arthritis in human and animal models. We
      hypothesize that the effect of methotrexate in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is due
      to the inhibition of aminoimidazole-carboxamide ribotide transformylase, a folate-dependent
      enzyme that catalyzes the last step in the de novo biosynthesis of inosine monophosphate.
      The resulting accumulation of aminoimidazole carboxamide riboside inhibits adenosine
      deaminase, therefore interfering with normal adenosine metabolism. It is well known that
      children with adenosine deaminase deficiency have severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome.
      This suggests that adenosine deaminase activity is key to immune competence and is
      associated with the mechanism of efficacy in methotrexate therapy of rheumatoid arthritis.

      Several studies indicate that supplemental folinic acid (5-formyltetrahydrofolate) used in
      large doses during low-dose methotrexate therapy for rheumatoid arthritis causes a flare in
      joint inflammation. However, supplemental folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) does not lessen
      the efficacy of the therapy. We further hypothesize that if methotrexate efficacy is driven
      by aminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide transformylase inhibition, folic acid supplementation
      should not alter urinary levels of aminoimidazole carboxamide, adenosine, and
      deoxyadenosine, while folinic acid supplementation should prevent the accumulation of these
      compounds.

      We will test our hypotheses both in people with rheumatoid arthritis and in Lewis rat
      adjuvant arthritis. Our objectives include: (1) determining if the dose level of
      methotrexate that is clinically optimal in the treatment of Lewis rat adjuvant arthritis
      interferes with normal adenosine metabolism; (2) determining the effectiveness of drugs that
      interfere with adenosine metabolism (deoxycoformycin, aminoimidazole carboxamide, and
      aminoimidazole carboxamide with a suboptimal dose of methotrexate) in Lewis rat adjuvant
      arthritis; and (3) determining whether supplemental folic acid and folinic acid during
      methotrexate therapy normalize adenosine metabolism in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
      The information we obtain will enhance the understanding of the biochemical action of
      antifolates/antimetabolites that are effective in the treatment of human and animal
      arthritis.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Individuals starting methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis.

          -  Study subjects should not currently be taking folic acid-containing vitamins.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Cancer, renal, or liver disease.

          -  Previous use of methotrexate within the past 6 months or current use of folic
             acid-containing supplements.
