TITLE:
      Blocking Tumor Necrosis Factor in Ankylosing Spondylitis
SUMMARY:
      The Division of Rheumatology at University of California San Francisco is conducting a
      research study on the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis (AS) with a new therapy currently
      used for people with other forms of arthritis. The drug, called Enbrel (or etanercept), is a
      protein that is given twice weekly by injection underneath the skin. It blocks the action of
      tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), a substance that may be involved in AS, rheumatoid
      arthritis, and other inflammatory conditions. We will randomly assign patients to receive
      either the drug or a placebo (inactive treatment) for 4 months. The results we will monitor
      include morning stiffness, spinal mobility, activities of daily life, and safety of the
      drug.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      In this Phase II clinical trial we will use tumor necrosis factor receptor p75 fusion
      protein (TNFR:Fc, or etanercept) to treat patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS). TNFR:Fc
      is an antagonist of tumor necrosis factor (TNF), a cytokine that researchers have shown to
      play a possible role in disease pathogenesis of ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid
      arthritis, and vasculitis, as well as other inflammatory conditions.

      TNFR:Fc consists of two molecules of the extracellular portion of the p75 receptor, each
      consisting of 235 amino acids. The two receptors are fused to the Fc portion of human IgG1,
      which consists of 232 amino acids. The gene fragments encoding the truncated TNFR and the Fc
      portion of human IgG1 are expressed in a Chinese hamster ovary cell line.

      Recent observations from animal and human studies suggest that tumor necrosis factor-alpha
      (TNF-alpha) may play a role in disease activity in AS and other seronegative
      spondyloarthropathies. This study aims to test the efficacy of TNFR:Fc used in conjunction
      with standard medications in the treatment of AS. We will give patients either 25mg of
      TNFR:Fc or placebo subcutaneously twice a week for 4 months. Outcome measures will include
      measures of function, pain, morning stiffness, patient global assessment, and swollen joint
      count, as well as safety measures.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Diagnosis of Ankylosing spondylitis

          -  Acceptable stable treatments during study: oral glucocorticoids (less than or equal
             to 10 mg/d) and/or NSAIDs at recommended doses and/or one of the following options:
             methotrexate (less than or equal to 20.0 mg/week); sulfasalazine (less than or equal
             to 3 grams/d); azathioprine (less than or equal to 2 mg/kg/d); methotrexate and
             sulfasalazine combination at doses listed above; 6-mercaptopurine (less than or equal
             to 1.5 mg/kg/d)

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, reactive arthritis, or
             Behýet disease

          -  Significant medical problems, such as diabetes mellitus

          -  History of active or recurrent infections

          -  Complete ankylosis of the entire spine
