TITLE:
      Heterosexual HIV Transmission Study (HATS)
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: To identify sexual behaviors and biological factors associated with an increased
      risk of heterosexual HIV transmission.

      SECONDARY: To assess the effect of safer sex counseling on behavior of sexually active
      heterosexuals in which one member of the couple is infected with HIV. To create a repository
      of serum, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, semen, and cervico-vaginal washings from
      heterosexual couples who are concordant (both partners HIV infected) and discordant (one
      partner HIV infected) with respect to HIV infection.

      In the United States, the number of AIDS cases attributed to heterosexual transmission,
      although still a small percentage of the total number of reported cases, is the most rapidly
      growing category. The rate at which HIV is transmitted between heterosexual couples and the
      factors that may impede or enhance heterosexual transmission are important to understanding
      and slowing the worldwide HIV epidemic.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      In the United States, the number of AIDS cases attributed to heterosexual transmission,
      although still a small percentage of the total number of reported cases, is the most rapidly
      growing category. The rate at which HIV is transmitted between heterosexual couples and the
      factors that may impede or enhance heterosexual transmission are important to understanding
      and slowing the worldwide HIV epidemic.

      This epidemiologic study is composed of three parts. PART A: In a prospective study,
      heterosexual couples who are discordant with respect to HIV infection will be evaluated at
      6-month intervals to determine whether HIV transmission has occurred and to identify
      biological and behavioral factors associated with HIV transmission from the infected partner
      to the uninfected partner.

      PART B: A case-control study will compare behavioral and biological data from heterosexual
      couples who are concordant for HIV infection at study entry with data from appropriate
      discordant couples enrolled in the prospective study. "Cases" will be HIV-infected secondary
      partners (from concordant couples) and "controls" will be uninfected secondary partners
      (from discordant couples).

      PART C: In a cross-sectional study, semen and cervico-vaginal washings will be collected
      from HIV-infected men and women in Parts A and B and evaluated for presence of HIV by
      virologic and serologic methods.

      Members of each couple will be interviewed separately by different interviewers.
      Demographic, sexual behavior and drug use history, and psychosocial information will be
      obtained. Participants will undergo clinical examination and various diagnostic laboratory
      tests (e.g., blood tests, urine screening, and gynecological tests). They will receive
      post-test counseling.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Risk Behavior:

        PART B ONLY:

          -  HIV-infected partner (primary partner) must have a known risk factor for HIV
             infection, such as

          -  Bisexual male.

          -  IV drug user.

          -  Hemophiliac male.

          -  Recipient of HIV-contaminated transfusion.

        Participants must meet the following criteria:

          -  Heterosexual couples in which at least one member is HIV-infected. Comparison group
             consists of heterosexual couples concordant that are both HIV infected.

          -  Able to speak English or Spanish.

        PART A secondary partners:

          -  Risk factor for HIV infection other than heterosexual contact, such as

          -  Evidence of any past or present parenteral drug use by self report, physical
             examination, or urine test.

          -  History of homosexual activity (if male) within 5 years prior to study entry.

        PART B secondary partners:

          -  Risk factor for HIV infection other than sexual contact with the primary partner,
             such as

          -  Evidence of any past or present parenteral drug use by self-report or by urine test.

          -  History of homosexual activity (if male) at any time since 1978.

          -  Sexual contact with another person with an HIV risk factor at any time since 1978,
             unless secondary partner is documented to be HIV uninfected subsequent to the last
             contact with such person.
