TITLE:
      A Study to Assess the Effect of Concomitant Administration of Fluconazole on the Clinical Pharmacokinetics of Methadone
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the pharmacokinetics and safety of concomitant administration of methadone and
      fluconazole.

      Injection drug users constitute the second largest subset of the U.S. population at risk for
      HIV infection and AIDS-associated mortality. Narcotic addiction is often treated by use of
      methadone. Fluconazole has been shown to be highly effective in treating symptomatic mucosal
      candidiasis, but it is unknown whether fluconazole affects methadone metabolism, which could
      result in symptoms of methadone withdrawal or overdose in patients taking the drugs in
      combination.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Injection drug users constitute the second largest subset of the U.S. population at risk for
      HIV infection and AIDS-associated mortality. Narcotic addiction is often treated by use of
      methadone. Fluconazole has been shown to be highly effective in treating symptomatic mucosal
      candidiasis, but it is unknown whether fluconazole affects methadone metabolism, which could
      result in symptoms of methadone withdrawal or overdose in patients taking the drugs in
      combination.

      Patients are randomized to receive methadone plus either fluconazole or placebo in clinic
      daily for 16 days. Study drugs are administered as close to 8 AM as possible. Patients must
      visit the Fort Greene clinic on study days 1, 2, 15, and 16; they may receive treatment at
      their home clinics on days 3 through 14.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Antiretroviral therapy.

          -  Intermittent acetaminophen, aspirin, and ibuprofen.

        Patients must have:

          -  CD4 count >= 250 cells/mm3 within 3 months prior to study entry.

          -  Received a stable dose of methadone for a minimum of 30 days prior to study entry.

          -  Negative urine toxicology screen (except for methadone or methadone metabolites)
             within 14 days prior to study entry.

          -  Reasonably good health.

          -  Life expectancy of at least 6 months.

          -  Ability and willingness to comply with protocol requirements.

        NOTE:

          -  Patients will be recruited from the methadone maintenance treatment program currently
             administered by Addiction Research and Treatment Corporation. Enrollment of women is
             encouraged.

        NOTE:

          -  Patients who are currently enrolled in CPCRA treatment and prophylaxis trials are
             eligible for this study provided they have been permanently removed from study drug
             on the other protocol.

        Prior Medication:

        Required:

          -  Stable dose of methadone for a minimum of 30 days prior to study entry.

        Allowed:

          -  Prior antiretroviral therapy (dose should be stable for 14 days prior to study
             entry).

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Known sensitivity to azoles, methadone, and other opiate narcotics.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Amiodarone.

          -  Anesthetics, general.

          -  Barbiturates.

          -  Carbamazepine.

          -  Cimetidine.

          -  Ciprofloxacin.

          -  Dexamethasone.

          -  Disulfiram.

          -  Erythromycin.

          -  Fluoroquinolones.

          -  Fluoxetine.

          -  Gestodene.

          -  Hydrochlorothiazide.

          -  Hypoglycemics, oral.

          -  Isoniazid.

          -  Itraconazole.

          -  Ketoconazole.

          -  Levomepromazine.

          -  MAO inhibitors.

          -  Methoxsalen.

          -  Nafcillin.

          -  Narcotic analgesics.

          -  Naringenin.

          -  Norethindrone.

          -  Omeprazole.

          -  Pentazocine.

          -  Phenothiazines.

          -  Phenytoin.

          -  Quinidine.

          -  Ranitidine.

          -  Rifabutin.

          -  Rifampin.

          -  Sedative hypnotics.

          -  Sulfaphenazole.

          -  Tranquilizers.

          -  Tricyclic antidepressants.

          -  Troleandomycin.

          -  Warfarin.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded within 30 days prior to study entry:

          -  Ketoconazole, fluconazole, or itraconazole.

          -  Experimental drugs.

        Alcohol or illicit drug abuse.
