TITLE:
      Fluoxetine for Anxious Children
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to see if it is safe and effective to use fluoxetine to treat
      children and adolescents with Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD).

      Anxiety disorders are one of the most common psychiatric disorders in children and
      adolescents, and can cause disturbances in the child's school, social, and family lives.
      Having an anxiety disorder puts a child at risk for depression and drug abuse, and appears
      to continue into adulthood. There is very little information on anxiety medications for
      children.

      Children will be assigned randomly (like tossing a coin) to receive either fluoxetine or an
      inactive placebo for 12 weeks. Each child will be monitored for symptoms and side effects
      throughout the study. He/she will have blood tests at Weeks 4, 8, and 12 to measure drug
      levels in the blood. The study will last for 12 weeks.

      A child is eligible for this study if he/she:

      Is 8 to 17 years old and has anxiety disorder.

      A child will not be eligible for this study if he/she:

      Has current major depression, panic disorder, or obsessive-compulsive disorder, or abuses
      alcohol or drugs.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To evaluate the safety and efficacy of fluoxetine as a treatment for children and
      adolescents with Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD).

      Anxiety disorders are among the most common childhood and adolescent psychiatric disorders
      and are often associated with academic, social, and family morbidity. These disorders
      frequently increase the risk for developing other psychiatric disorders (e.g., depression,
      substance abuse), aggregate in families, and appear to continue into adulthood. Except for
      Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, there are very few pharmacological treatment studies for
      childhood anxiety disorders. Given the sparsity and methodological problems of previous
      anxiety pharmacological studies, it is clear that further investigation of the use of
      pharmacological treatment of children and adolescents with these disorders is needed.

      Patients are randomized to receive either fixed-dose fluoxetine or placebo for 12 weeks.
      Patients are assessed for psychiatric symptomatology, functional status, and side effects.
      In addition, to assess attainment of steady state and compliance with treatment, plasma
      levels of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine are measured at 4, 8, and 12 weeks. To standardize
      the treatment protocol and to assure that both groups (fluoxetine and placebo) receive
      equivalent nonpharmacological treatment, a manual is used. Potential predictors of clinical
      response (such as age, sex, duration and severity of anxiety, school absenteeism,
      sub-syndromal depressive symptoms, family history of anxiety or mood disorders) are
      explored.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients must have:

        Generalized anxiety disorder.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        Excluded:

        Patients with current major depression, as well as patients with panic and
        obsessive-compulsive disorder.

        Excluded:

        Current substance abuse.
