TITLE:
      Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to find the best treatment for Tourette's Syndrome
      (TS)-spectrum obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), which includes symptoms of TS, e.g.,
      repeated and involuntary body movements (tics).

      There are 2 parts to this study: In Part 1, patients are placed into 1 of 2 groups based on
      type of OCD, determined by medical history and family member interviews. In Part 2, patients
      are treated with fluvoxamine (FVX) for 8 weeks. If patients do not respond to FVX alone,
      either haloperidol or an inactive placebo will be added to the FVX regimen; patients will
      take this drug combination for 4 weeks. Patients will be monitored throughout the trial.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To advance the neurobiology and treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) by focusing
      on Tourette's Syndrome (TS)-spectrum OCD as a possible homogeneous form of OCD, and
      investigating the relevance of intact 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) function to the mechanism
      of anti-OC drug action. The validity of TS-spectrum OCD as a distinct subtype is assessed
      using a detailed clinical, family, drug treatment response profile in adult OCD patients.

      In Study I, patients are divided prospectively into 2 putative subtypes (TS-spectrum and
      non-TS-spectrum OCD) on the basis of clinical history and direct, structured interviews of
      family members (approximately 400 interviews).

      In Study II, patients enter an 8-week single-blind trial with the potent and selective 5-HT
      reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine (FX). Patients with an incomplete response to FX alone
      (approximately 64 patients) are randomized to a 4-week double-blind trial of FX in
      combination with the dopamine (DA) 2 antagonist olanzapine (OLA) or placebo (PLA).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria required that subjects, ages 14-70 years, have at least a 1-year
        duration of a current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV (DSM-IV)
        principal diagnosis of OCD. Furthermore, the OCD had to be defined by a rating of
        "moderate" or greater on the global severity item of the Clinical Global Impressions (CGI)
        scale and have a Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) score of 19 or greater.

        Exclusion criteria included primary depression, schizophrenia, or other psychotic
        disorders; active bipolar disorder; abuse of alcohol or other significant substance within
        6 months; increased risk of seizures or history of neurosurgery, encephalitis, or
        significant head trauma; or a significant medical condition, such as heart, liver, or
        renal disease. Subjects with an intelligence quotient of less than 80 as determined with
        the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (Kaufman and Kaufman 1990) were excluded.
