TITLE:
      Asymptomatic Cardiac Ischemia Pilot (ACIP) Study
SUMMARY:
      To assess the feasibility of and test the methodology for a full-scale clinical trial of
      therapies for asymptomatic cardiac ischemia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Asymptomatic cardiac ischemia, frequently designated as silent myocardial ischemia, refers
      to episodes of objectively demonstrable transient ischemia in the absence of symptoms.
      Annually, more than one million patients suffer acute myocardial infarction. Of the
      approximately 700,000 who are discharged alive from the hospital, as many as 180,000 will be
      asymptomatic but have evidence of myocardial ischemia on a pre-discharge exercise test.
      Asymptomatic ischemia has been linked with sudden death or myocardial infarction. It is
      estimated that in the United States over six million patients have chronic, symptomatic
      coronary heart disease and up to three million of these may exhibit transient asymptomatic
      myocardial ischemia. Asymptomatic ischemia is thought to be present in the majority of
      coronary heart disease patients with stable angina pectoris, over 70 percent of all ischemic
      episodes being asymptomatic. Asymptomatic ischemia following myocardial infarction or in the
      presence of chronic stable angina may be associated with substantially increased morbidity
      and mortality

      Traditionally, treatment of patients with coronary heart disease has been given for and
      guided by patients' symptoms. There was a growing trend toward recognizing asymptomatic
      cardiac ischemia and according it importance equal to that of symptomatic ischemia. Many
      physicians believed that suppression of asymptomatic ischemia in patients with coronary
      heart disease would reduce morbidity and mortality. This was leading to rapidly increasing
      and widespread applications of both medical and revascularization therapies.

      In 1989, there was a lack of knowledge as to the relative efficacy of different treatment
      strategies to control asymptomatic cardiac ischemia. Given the estimated high prevalence of
      asymptomatic cardiac ischemia in patients with coronary heart disease and evidence of
      increased risk of untoward outcome, the public health problem was of sufficient magnitude to
      warrant a pilot study to determine to what extent asymptomatic ischemia could be controlled.
      If the pilot study demonstrated feasibility, a full-scale clinical trial would then be
      considered to evaluate the impact of effective treatment of asymptomatic ischemia on
      survival and cardiovascular morbidity in patients with coronary heart disease.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      A total of 1,959 patients were screened by AECG monitoring; 49 percent had asymptomatic
      ischemia, and 65 percent were enrolled in the study. The 618 patients were randomized to one
      of the three treatment strategies: 202 to angina-guided medical strategy with titration of
      anti-ischemic medication to relieve angina; 202 to angina-guided plus AECG ischemia-guided
      medical strategy with titration of anti-ischemic medication to eliminate both angina and
      AECG ischemia; and 212 to revascularization by angioplasty or bypass surgery. Patients able
      to take either beta-adrenergic blocking agents or calcium antagonists were also randomized
      to receive one of two medical combination regimens: atenolol plus nifedipine or diltiazem
      plus isosorbide dinitrate. Those who could be treated with only one regimen, such as
      asthmatic patients, were assigned to the appropriate regimen. The primary outcome was the
      absence of ischemia at twelve weeks. Recruitment ended in January 1993. Clinical based
      follow-up was completed for 18 months and survival status free of MI was completed for 24
      months
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men aand women with angiographically documented coronary artery disease, ischemia on both
        stress (exercise) testing and 48-hour ambulatory electrocardiogram monitoring, and who
        were amenable to revascularization.
