TITLE:
      Hypoalgesic Effects Neural Mobilization Techniques
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study was to evaluate the immediate mechanical hypoalgesic effect of
      neural mobilization in asymptomatic subjects. We also compared neural gliding versus neural
      stretching to see which produced greater hypoalgesic effects in asymptomatic subjects.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Asymptomatic subjects will be randomly allocated into three groups: the neural glide group;
      the neural stretch group; and the placebo group. Each subject will receive one treatment
      session. Outcome measures included bilateral pressure pain threshold measured at the
      trigeminal, cervical, and tibialis anterior points, which will assess pre-treatment and
      immediately post-treatment by a blinded assessor. Three-way repeated measures analysis of
      variance was used to evaluate changes in pressure pain threshold, with group (experimental
      or control) as the between-subjects variable and time (pre-, post-treatment) or side
      (dominant, nondominant) as the within-subjects variable.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Asymptomatic subjects who met the inclusion criterion of being between 18 and 30
             years old.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  rheumatologic diseases or any type of cancer, cervical surgery in the past, whiplash
             trauma and undergoing any type of treatment like physical therapy, manual therapy,
             osteopathy, chiropraxis, acupuncture during the last three months. All patients
             recruited for the study complained of pain localized in the neck and/or head region.
             Initial screening was accomplished by telephone and eligible persons attended a
             evaluation appointment.

          -  development of systemic or degenerative diseases

          -  subjects with symptoms of depression according Beck's questionnaire

          -  pain in any area between the lower back and head in the last 9 months

          -  traumatic event in the past 12 months

          -  history of neck or face pain in the last 6 months
