TITLE:
      Phase 4 Study in Secondary Hypothyroidism: Body Weight Adapted Thyroxin Treatment and Triiodothyronine Supplementation
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine whether a body weight adjusted dose of thyroxin is
      superior to treatment guided by laboratory results of thyroxin hormones in patients with
      central hypothyroidism. Moreover beneficial effects of triiodthyronine supplementation are
      investigated.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Backround: A normal thyroid function is critical for metabolism, well-being and cognitive
      function. It is now well accepted that primary subclinical hypothyroidism, characterized by
      normal circulating thyroid hormones (fT3 and fT4) and elevated TSH, should be treated to
      improve reduced quality of life and abnormalities of lipid metabolism. In central
      hypothyroidism (CH) the dose of replacement therapy aims to achieve normal thyroxin (T4)
      concentrations as defined by appropriate reference populations. Adequate thyroxin treatment
      is especially challenging, as T4 cannot be titrated according to endogenous TSH levels
      because of the impaired hypothalamic-pituitary unit. The majority of untreated CH patients
      show normal (40 %) or elevated TSH levels (35 %) while only a minority has reduced
      concentrations (25 %) {Faglia, 1979 #1}. These findings are explained by the lack of
      pulsatile secretion and nocturnal TSH surge, which has been attributed to impaired
      thyrotroph function in CH patients {Caron, 1986 #2}. Moreover, impaired biological activity
      of TSH itself due to reduced glycosylation has been described in secondary hypothyroidism.

      In a cross sectional study performed in patients with central hypothyroidism, we found
      elevated cholesterol levels and increased ankle reflex time suggesting subtle
      hypothyroidism, though fT3 and fT4 serum concentrations were within the normal range. The
      average dose of thyroxin (T4) applied in these patients with central hypothyroidism was 1.1
      µg/kg bw, which is below the average dose recommended in primary hypothyroidism (1.6 µg/kg
      bw). We hypothesized that these results might indicate suboptimal T4 replacement therapy,
      not detectable by current laboratory testing.

      Hypothesis: To investigate the effects of a body weight adjusted T4 or T3T4 dose on
      metabolism, well-being and cognitive function.

      Study design: Placebo controlled trial in patients with central hypothyroidism following a
      double blind cross-over design.

      Intervention: Three different treatment regimes (5 weeks each) were compared: "CON-T4",
      empirically chosen, current dose of T4 (1 ± 0.05 μg/kg body weight (bw); "OPT-T4", optimized
      T4 treatment (1.6 μg/kg bw T4); "T3T4", combination of triiodothyronine (T3, 0.16) and T4
      (1.44 μg/kg bw). Biochemical parameters, ankle reflex time and neurocognitive functions were
      assessed.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  hypopituitarism of at least 3 axes (TSH plus gonadotropin, somatotropin,
             corticotropin or ADH deficiency)

          -  termination of surgical or radiation treatment of pituitary tumors at least six month
             before study entry

          -  BMI of 20 - 39.9 kg/m2

          -  non-smoking status.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  history of cardiovascular or pulmonary diseases

          -  current thyroxin dosage > 1.6 µg/kg bw

          -  pregnancy

          -  epilepsy

          -  cerebrovascular diseases

          -  nodular goiter
