TITLE:
      Granulocyte Transfusion Study
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate granulocyte transfusion therapy with respect to its prophylactic and therapeutic
      effectiveness to prevent and aid recovery from infection. The study trials were conducted
      simultaneously.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Infection remains a major cause of death in patients receiving chemotherapy for malignant
      diseases. One approach to the problem of septicemia and high mortality in these patients was
      the therapeutic use of granulocyte transfusions. Improvements in collection techniques,
      employing continuous flow centrifugation, permitted the collection of granulocytes from a
      single, normal donor in sufficient numbers to study their application in the treatment of
      infections in granulocytopenic patients. Studies had demonstrated the efficacy of
      granulocyte transfusions as an adjunct in the therapy of septicemia due to gram negative
      microorganisms associated with granulocytopenia.

      The aims of the study were to determine (1) whether infections could be prevented in
      patients who received granulocytes prophylactically and (2) whether recovery from infection
      was aided in patients who received granulocytes therapeutically. Both trials utilized
      controls who received no granulocytes.

      Four contracts were awarded in September 1976. The protocol designed to evaluate the
      efficacy of prophylactic granulocyte transfusions was completed at the close of 1977. The
      protocol for the therapeutic trial was completed in April 1978. Approximately 90 patients
      were randomized in the prophylactic trial and 51 in the therapeutic trial. The Recruitment
      and Intervention Phase ended in February 1980. The trial has concluded.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Prophylactic Trial and Therapeutic Trial: randomized, non-blind, sequential. Eligible
      patients were randomized to daily granulocyte transfusions or no granulocyte transfusions.

      The study completion date listed in this record was inferred from the first publication
      listed in the Citations section of this study record.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Prophylactic Trial: males and females, 12 years or older, who were in the first induction
        phase of chemotherapy for acute leukemia, who had severe neutropenia, and who did not have
        documented infection.

        Therapeutic Trial: males and females, any
