TITLE:
      Continuous Video- EEG Monitoring in the Acute Phase in Patients With a Cerebrovascular Attack- Randomisation of a Subpopulation Regarding Treatment Strategy
SUMMARY:
      Stroke is a major cause of epilepsy. The pathophysiological mechanisms of poststroke
      epilepsy are not known. Subclinical epileptiform discharges could contribute to the neuronal
      damage and influence functional outcome. Electro-encefalography (EEG) is the golden standard
      to detect interictal, ictal and subclinical epileptic brain activity.

      Patients admitted to the stroke unit with an ischemic or hemorrhagic cerebrovascular attack
      will undergo a 24 hours video-EEG monitoring to detect epileptiform discharges. Clinical and
      paraclinical (imaging, serum markers of neuronal damage) parameters will be analysed
      together with the EEG results. The EEG results will be correlated with the occurence of
      epileptic seizures and functional outcome and mortality in the acute phase and in the
      long-term. When subclinical epileptic discharges are found on the EEG, patients will be
      asked to participate in a second part of the study where they will be randomised into a
      treatment (with an anti-epileptic drug) versus no-treatment group for a period of 6 months.
      Outcome parameters will be the occurrence of epileptic seizures, mortality and functional
      outcome.

      Our main hypothesis is that the occurrence of subclinical epileptiform discharges during the
      acute phase following stroke influences functional outcome.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with ischemic arteria cerebri media infarct and spontaneous intraparenchymal
             bleeding

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with subarachnoidal haemorrhage, traumatic haemorrhage (epidural/subdural
             bleeding), cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, epilepsy, anti-epileptic treatment,
             transient ischemic attack, indication for urgent neurosurgical intervention
