TITLE:
      Hepatitis B Vaccine Clinical Trial
SUMMARY:
      To determine the efficacy of a hepatitis vaccine in preventing hepatitis B.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Although most carriers of HBsAg are asymptomatic, a substantial proportion eventually
      develop chronic active hepatitis and cirrhosis. There is also overwhelming evidence that the
      hepatitis B virus is the single most important causative factor of hepatocellular carcinoma.
      Thus, mass immunization programs against HBV infection may ultimately affect not only the
      incidence of acute hepatitis B and the pool of chronic carriers but may also reduce the
      morbidity and mortality from chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular
      carcinoma.

      Krugman and his co-workers laid the groundwork for active immunization against hepatitis B
      in 1970 to 1973. They discovered that a 1:10 dilution of hepatitis B infective serum lost
      its infectivity when boiled for one minute but retained its antigenicity and prevented
      hepatitis B in 70 percent of vaccinated subjects. Hilleman and his colleagues at the Merck
      Institute of Therapeutic Research developed a more sophisticated vaccine consisting of
      highly purified, formalin-inactivated HBsAg particles derived from the plasma of chronic
      carriers of the antigen. By 1978, data were sufficient to permit testing in a clinical
      trial.

      The first subject was inoculated in November 1978, and by October 1979, recruitment had
      ended. In May 1980, all trial events were reviewed and classified by an expert panel. In
      June 1980 the code of vaccine and placebo allocation was broken.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double blind, fixed-sample. A total of 549 subjects were allocated to the
      vaccine group in which they were treated with highly purified formalin-inactivated virus
      subunits derived from the plasma of chronic carriers of hepatitis B. A total of 534 were
      allocated to the placebo group. Both groups received injections at 0, 1 month, and 6 months
      unless evidence of infection developed before the series was completed.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men at high risk for hepatitis B virus infection, 36 years of age or younger, no recent
        symptoms of hepatitis, blood specimen negative for HBsAg, anti-HBs and anti-HBe.
