TITLE:
      Acupuncture for Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
SUMMARY:
      This study will look at the effectiveness of acupuncture for treating carpal tunnel syndrome
      (CTS). People who participate in this study will have CTS that has been diagnosed by
      physical examination and neurological testing. We will randomly assign study participants to
      receive one of the three types of acupuncture either once, twice, or three times weekly for
      a total of 6 weeks. Acupuncturists will treat one group of patients with true acupuncture.
      They will give the other two groups of patients one of two alternative acupuncture
      treatments that do not use the true acupuncture points. The patients and evaluators will not
      know the type of acupuncture (True, Alternative 1, or Alternative 2) that is being used. The
      acupuncturists will not communicate with the patients and will not be involved in patient
      evaluation.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of acupuncture for carpal tunnel
      syndrome (CTS). The study's aims are: (1) To show that we can develop a "single-blind mute"
      methodology that will enable true and alternative acupuncture to be given in a standardized
      and unbiased fashion. (2) To identify and standardize the most appropriate invasive control
      (alternative) acupuncture points for CTS. (3) To develop a manual of acupuncture methods
      that codifies the techniques of administration of true and alternative points that can be
      used at any site performing a randomized clinical trial for CTS. (4) To demonstrate that
      patient recruitment for and retention in a small, short-term, randomized controlled trial
      (RCT) of acupuncture for CTS is sufficient to justify a full-scale RCT. (5) To determine, in
      an RCT, whether true acupuncture provides meaningful benefit for pain in CTS compared to
      alternative acupuncture and whether the frequency of administration of acupuncture
      influences the outcome.

      The patients and evaluators will be blinded as to the type of acupuncture (True, Alternative
      1, or Alternative 2). The acupuncturists will not be blinded but will be mute
      (noncommunicative to the patients) and will not be involved in patient evaluation. Patients
      will have clinically and electrodiagnostically proven CTS. They will be randomized to
      receive one of the three types of acupuncture either once, twice, or three times weekly for
      6 weeks total (three by three design). Our aim is to recruit 144 patients for this study.
      The primary outcome measure will be a validated CTS Symptom Severity Scale at 2 weeks after
      the last acupuncture treatment. We will evaluate patients 10 weeks later to determine the
      durability of any improvement from acupuncture. Other outcome measures include subjective
      symptoms, functional status, analgesic consumption, frequency/duration of splinting, and
      effect on median nerve conduction velocity.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Hand or wrist pain combined with parathesias or numbness in any or all fingers,
             predominating in a median nerve distribution, and especially occurring at night

          -  Symptoms unresponsive or poorly responsive to standard conservative therapy (wrist
             splints, analgesics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)

          -  Electrodiagnostic evidence of distal median neuropathy compatible with carpal tunnel
             syndrome (to be confirmed at study site)

          -  Symptoms present for at least 3 months

          -  No prior treatment with acupuncture for carpal tunnel syndrome

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Evidence of pronounced abductor pollicis weakness or significant thenar wasting
             (probable candidate for carpal tunnel surgery)

          -  Prior carpal tunnel surgery on affected side

          -  Use of narcotic analgesia

          -  History of wrist or hand fracture on the symptomatic limb

          -  Current pregnancy or less than 3 months postpartum

          -  Corticosteroid injection into the carpal tunnel within 3 months

          -  History of generalized peripheral neuropathy or clinical or electrodiagnostic
             evidence of generalized polyneuropathy or mononeuropathy multiplex

          -  History of other neurologic disorders which may cause confusion with the diagnosis of
             carpal tunnel syndrome, including but not limited to stroke, cervical radiculopathy,
             myelopathy, subdural hematoma, brain tumor

          -  Inflammatory articular disease or tendinitis of the hand or wrist by history or
             physical examination

          -  Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus

          -  Clinical hypothyroidism

          -  Chronic renal failure or renal dialysis or forearm fistulae

          -  Other disorder known to predispose to carpal tunnel syndrome including acromegaly,
             multiple myeloma, amyloidosis
