TITLE:
      Effects of Labetalol on Nicotine Administration in Humans - 14
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of labetalol in response to
      intravenous nicotine
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The purpose of this study is to determine whether labetalol, an alpha and beta adrenergic
      blocker, will block the subjective and physiological effects of intravenously administered
      nicotine in humans. A total of 12 subjects will participate in the double blind placebo
      controlled, outpatient study. Subjects will have 3 separate experimental sessions 3-9 days
      apart. On each of the experimental sessions, a single oral dose of low (100mg) or high dose
      of labetalol (200mg ), or placebo will be administered. Two hours after labetalol or placebo
      treatment, subjects will receive 15 variance grams nicotine base/kg intravenously. Several
      physiological endocrine and subjective measures will be obtained during the sessions. We
      propose that blockage of adrenergic receptors by labetalol will significantly block the
      physological and subjective effects of nicotine.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Male/Female, aged 21-55 years with a smoking history of at least 1 pack of cigarettes
        daily for at least 1 year. In good health as verified by medical history, screening
        examination, and screening laboratory tests.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        History of heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, COPD, any other medical condition
        which physician investigator deems inappropriate for subject participation. Pregnant or
        lactating or not using adequate birth control methods. Use of regular psychotropic
        medication (antidepressants, antipsychotics, or anxiolytics and recent psychiatric
        history). Chronic use of systemic steroids or antihistamines. Abuse of alcohol or any
        other recreational or prescription drug. Regular use of any other tobacco products,
        including smokeless tobacco and nicotine products.
