TITLE:
      Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP)
SUMMARY:
      The primary objective was to assess whether long-term administration of antihypertensive
      therapy to elderly subjects with isolated systolic hypertension reduced the combined
      incidence of fatal and non-fatal stroke. The secondary objectives were to evaluate: the
      effect of long-term antihypertensive therapy on mortality from any cause in elderly people
      with isolated systolic hypertension; possible adverse effects of chronic use of
      antihypertensive drug treatment in this population; the effect of therapy on indices of
      quality-of-life; the natural history of isolated systolic hypertension in the placebo
      population.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      More than 3 million persons in the United States over the age of 60 have isolated systolic
      hypertension. They face an excess risk (2-3 fold) of stroke, other cardiovascular disease
      and death. Population-based data show that the prevalence rises from approximately 8 percent
      in the age group 60-69 years to approximately 20 percent over the age of 80. Based on
      available data, an annual stroke rate of 2.0 percent has been estimated in this population.
      The full-scale clinical trial followed a pilot study conducted from 1980 to 1983.
      Recruitment in the trial began in March 1985 and was finished in January 1988. Follow-up
      ended in February 1991. Data analysis continued through October 1996.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      A randomized, double-blind trial in which 2,365 subjects were assigned to active treatment
      and 2,371 to placebo. For the active treatment group, a stepped-care regimen was used which
      included chlorthalidone 12.5 or 25 mg/day, and as needed, addition of atenolol 25 or 50
      mg/day or reserpine, 0.05 or 0.10 mg/day. Treatment goal was to reduce systolic blood
      pressure by at least 20 mm Hg from baseline and to below 160 mm Hg with minimal amounts of
      study medication. The primary endpoint was the incidence of fatal and non-fatal stroke.
      Secondary endpoints were cardiovascular and coronary morbidity and mortality, all-cause
      mortality, and quality-of-life measures.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, aged 60 or over, with isolated systolic hypertension.
