TITLE:
      Unstable Angina Pectoris Trial
SUMMARY:
      To compare the efficacy of medical or surgical (coronary artery bypass graft) therapy with
      regard to survival and quality of life in patients with unstable angina and requisite
      coronary anatomy as defined by angiography.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Angina pectoris is a symptomatic condition of attacks of chest pain, often debilitating. It
      is caused by a decreased supply of blood to the heart, such as that which might occur in
      coronary artery disease. The usual treatment of angina pectoris is designed to relieve the
      symptoms. It includes avoidance of activities that produce the discomfort and the use of
      nitroglycerin and beta blocking drugs. Soon after the introduction of coronary bypass
      surgery, many doctors enthusiastically adopted this approach in treating patients with
      unstable angina.

      In 1972, emphasizing that there was no definitive evidence showing the superiority of
      intensive medical management or coronary bypass surgery in determining mortality and
      morbidity in patients hospitalized with unstable angina, some of the participating groups in
      the NHLBI Myocardial Infarction Research Units developed a cooperative clinical trial to
      compare these medical and surgical approaches to therapy.

      From 1972 through 1976, 288 patients were entered into this randomized clinical trial. One
      hundred forty-seven patients received intensive pharmacological medical therapy, and 141
      comparable patients underwent coronary artery bypass surgery. Careful follow-up studies were
      performed on patients in both groups, in-hospital and during the post-hospital phase. These
      studies included, apart from routine physical examinations, resting electrocardiograms,
      chest x-ray films, and grade exercise tolerance tests at six months and twelve months.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, non-blind, sequential design with a control group and an experimental group. The
      patients in the experimental group were treated with coronary bypass surgery. Patients in
      the control group received intensive medical management. Endpoints were mortality and
      morbidity measures, such as incidence of myocardial infarction and persistence of angina.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 21 to 65. Angina pectoris (class III or class IV) at rest or with
        minimal exercise.
