TITLE:
      Improving Functional Recovery After Hip Fracture
SUMMARY:
      This project will assess the effectiveness of a novel approach involving patient education
      and strength training to improve functional recovery after a hip fracture. Participants will
      be randomly assigned to one of two study groups. One group (control group) will receive
      standard medical care. The other group will participate in a program of patient education
      and strength training, including an at-home walking program.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The specific aims of this project are to (a) implement an intervention program of patient
      education focused on self-efficacy (the belief that one's actions are responsible for
      successful outcomes) and strength training designed to improve the postoperative
      rehabilitation of older persons (65 years of age and older) who have sustained a fracture of
      the hip; and (b) evaluate in a randomized trial the efficacy of this intervention program to
      improve the overall postoperative functional status of such patients and decrease the rate
      of their subsequent institutionalization.

      The study will also (a) describe and document the risk factors for functional deterioration,
      recurrent falls, and subsequent institutionalization in a cohort of such patients; (b)
      assess self-efficacy beliefs and their ability to influence and predict postoperative
      functional capacity in such patients; and (c) document the costs associated with
      implementing the program and generate data that can provide the basis for subsequent
      cost-benefit analysis.

      We hypothesize that (a) a program of patient education focusing on self-efficacy and
      strength training can improve the functional capacity and reduce the rate of
      institutionalization of older persons following hip fracture; and (b) clinical, psychosocial
      factors, muscle strength, and balance are multifactorial determinants of functional
      capacity, recurrent falls, and subsequent institutionalization in hip fracture patients.

      We will randomize 200 patients who have sustained a primary unilateral hip fracture to the
      multiple-component intervention program of patient education and high-intensity strength
      training or to standard medical care. The intervention program will comprise four major
      components: (1) an in-hospital postoperative patient instruction protocol conducted prior to
      discharge with the patient and a family member or caregiver; (2) a hospital-based, 8-week
      program of high-intensity isokinetic strength training for patients; (3) an at-home walking
      program designed to enable patients to maintain strength and physical activity following the
      hospital-based portion of the intervention; and (4) supportive telephone calls through which
      patients and their families or caregivers will have regular and ongoing contact with a
      hospital-based interventionist, as well as other hip fracture patients.

      The principal outcome is within-patient change in the physical, social, and role function
      subscales of the SF-36. Secondary measures of outcome, including muscle strength, balance,
      functional status on the Cummings Scale, activities of daily living, recurrent falls, and
      rate of institutionalization, will be assessed at baseline and 1 year post-discharge.

      The long-term objective of the project is to improve the overall functional capacity and
      reduce both recurrent falls and the need for institutionalization of hip fracture patients
      through development and evaluation of an intervention program whose feasibility and cost
      have the potential for application in a wide range of institutional settings involved in the
      treatment and rehabilitation of such patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who are 65 years of age and older, and who have been admitted for a hip
             fracture to the Fracture Service at New York Presbyterian Hospital.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who are unable to give informed consent on the 4th or 5th day after surgery.

          -  Patients whose hip fracture is due to underlying disease, secondary to malignancy
             (cancer).

          -  Patients who do not speak English.

          -  Patients for whom exercise is contraindicated or whose physicians believe that
             exercise is contraindicated.

          -  Patients who do not have access to a telephone or cannot be reached by telephone.

          -  Patients and physicians who refuse to participate or who intend to relocate upon
             discharge.
