TITLE:
      Treatment of Social Phobia
SUMMARY:
      Social phobia is a very common and debilitating disorder, with public speaking anxiety being
      the most common fear. Psychologists have found that treating patients for their fear of
      public speaking, through cognitive-behavioral treatment (talk-based therapy) or exposure
      treatment (where participants participate in actual public speaking sessions), not only
      helps patients overcome this fear but also helps them overcome their more general social
      fears. However, little is known about how this change occurs during therapy. This study
      tries to identify the factors that contribute most to successful therapy.

      Patients are assigned randomly (like tossing a coin) to 1 of 3 groups. Group 1 will receive
      cognitive-behavioral treatment and Group 2 will receive exposure treatment. Group 3 will not
      receive treatment. Study leaders will monitor patient response to treatment through
      behavioral tests and assessments.

      An individual may be eligible for this study if he/she:

      Has social phobia with public speaking anxiety.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The primary goal of the present study is to identify the mediators and moderators of change
      in the treatment of social phobia and, in so doing suggest a common mechanism of action for
      all brief psychosocial interventions. Perceived self-efficacy of social behavior, negative
      cognitive appraisal (estimated social costs), and perceived emotional control will be
      considered as potential mediators; avoidant personality disorder and the generalized subtype
      of social phobia will be considered as potential predictors for poor treatment outcome.

      Social phobia is a very prevalent and debilitating disorder, with public speaking anxiety
      being the most common fear among socially phobic individuals. Although there are a number of
      effective psychosocial treatments for social phobia (e.g., cognitive-behavioral treatments
      and exposure therapy) very little is known about the underlying mechanism of therapeutic
      change (i.e., the mediators of change), and the variables that are predictive of treatment
      outcome (i.e., the moderators of change). Furthermore, it is unclear why treating
      individuals for their public speaking anxiety can generalize to other untreated social
      fears.

      Patients are randomly assigned to either a comprehensive cognitive-behavioral treatment for
      social phobia (n=43), a performance-based exposure treatment for public speaking anxiety
      without cognitive intervention (n=43), or a waitlist control group (n=43). Clinician
      ratings, behavioral tests, cognitive assessments, subjective ratings, and physiological
      measures are employed to determine the degree of therapeutic gains in various social phobia
      domains. The main hypothesis is that perceived emotional control will mediate treatment
      outcome and generality of effectiveness independent of the specific treatment condition.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients must have:

        Social phobia with public speaking anxiety.
