TITLE:
      Constraint-Based Therapy to Improve Motor Function in Children With Cerebral Palsy
SUMMARY:
      Pediatric Constraint-Induced (CI) Movement therapy is a rehabilitation program designed to
      improve motor function in children with partial paralysis. Children with cerebral palsy may
      have one arm that has significantly greater function (good arm) than the other (bad arm).
      Restricting the use of the good arm may improve the use of the bad arm. In pediatric CI
      therapy, the good arm is put in a sling to force increased use of the bad arm. The bad arm
      is also trained each day for several weeks. This study will test the ability of pediatric CI
      therapy to improve motor function in children with cerebral palsy.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Cerebral palsy afflicts at least two in 1,000 children in the United States and
      approximately 2,000,000 children worldwide. Behavioral techniques that impact the plasticity
      of the nervous system need to be incorporated into practical, evidence-based therapeutic
      interventions for this condition.

      CI therapy was derived from basic research with animal and human subjects. Randomized,
      controlled studies indicate that it can substantially reduce the motor deficit of adult
      patients with mild to moderately severe chronic strokes and can increase their independence
      over a period of years. CI therapy involves motor restriction of the less affected upper
      extremity for a period of 2 to 3 weeks while concurrently training the more affected upper
      limb. This gives rise to concentrated, repetitive use of the more affected extremity. In
      adults, CI therapy has lead to a large increase in use-dependent cortical reorganization
      involving the recruitment of substantial new regions of the brain in the innervation of more
      affected extremity movement.

      The study will evaluate CI therapy in a pediatric population. The study will test whether
      pediatric CI therapy can promote new and improved motor behavior in young children with
      hemiparesis associated with cerebral palsy. Pediatric CI therapy involves total restraint of
      the unaffected upper extremity with simultaneous repetitive use of the affected extremity
      for 6 hours/day for 21 consecutive days.

      Fifty-two children ages 2 to 6 years old with hemiparetic cerebral palsy will be randomly
      assigned to either the pediatric CI therapy group or to a control group. The control group
      will receive standard rehabilitation therapy. All children will have a complete medical
      evaluation with emphasis on motor function prior to treatment initiation. Children will
      undergo follow-up testing at 1, 6, and 12 months post-treatment. The primary study
      assessment tools are the Pediatric Developmental Motor Scales - II (PDMS-II), DASI – II,
      Bayley Developmental Skills Test, Pediatric Motor Activity Log (PMAL), Child Arm Use Test
      (CAUT), and Emerging Behavior Scale (EBS).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

          -  Clinical diagnosis of hemiparetic cerebral palsy consistent with criteria in Swaiman
             and Russman (1999) and Badawi et al. (1998)

          -  Recommended for participation in pediatric rehabilitation and/or early intervention

          -  Lives within 50 miles of the Civitan Center at University of Alabama at Birmingham or
             the family is willing to temporarily relocate to the Birmingham area for treatment

        Exclusion Criteria

          -  Profound bilateral hearing loss with the use of hearing aids

          -  Severe visual impairment

          -  Serious seizure disorder or uncontrolled seizures

          -  Genetic and syndromic conditions historically excluded for CP registries

          -  Familial Spastic Paraplegia

          -  Ataxic Cerebral Palsy

          -  Diagnosis of Pervasive Developmental Disability or autism

          -  Serious or recurring medical complications

          -  Scheduled for surgery within 12 months of study entry
