TITLE:
      Stress Reduction and Atherosclerotic CVD in Blacks
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the effectiveness of stress reduction with Transcendental Meditation (TM) on
      left ventricular hypertrophy, left ventricular function, blood pressure, psychosocial stress
      and quality of life, and cardiovascular disease risk factors.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Blacks in the United States have disproportionately high rates of cardiovascular disease and
      mortality. Left ventricular hypertrophy, the primary manifestation of hypertensive heart
      disease and a major independent predictor of cardiovascular mortality, is twice as prevalent
      in Blacks with hypertension as in whites. Research has implicated chronic
      socio-environmental and psychological stress in the etiology of hypertension and left
      ventricular hypertrophy in Blacks. The trial seeks to investigate directly the impact of
      stress reduction programs for treating hypertensive heart disease in Blacks, since
      conventional antihypertensive drug therapies are less successful than expected. Moreover,
      these therapies frequently have adverse side effects on quality of life, and have low
      compliance rates, particularly in minorities.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The first study conducted between 1994 and 1999 used transcendental meditation for stress
      reduction in hypertensive heart disease. The study was randomized and blind. Subjects were
      randomized to practice TM for twelve months or to receive health education. The following
      measurements were obtained: left ventricular mass and function using echocardiography;
      clinic blood pressure and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; urinary sodium excretion;
      alcohol consumption, weight, physical activity, cigarette smoking, and previous use of
      antihypertensive medication; various quality of life measures including physical
      functioning, psychosocial functioning, subjective symptoms, trait anger and
      anger-expression, stress impact scale, personal efficacy and health locus of control, social
      supports, ego development, and social desirability.

      The trial was part of the Collaborative Projects on Minority Health, an Institute- initiated
      program to foster collaborative clinical research that focused on new and improved
      approaches for diagnosis, management, and prevention of cardiovascular, lung, and blood
      diseases in minorities. The trial was part of a two-grant collaboration on Nonpharmacologic
      Treatments for Managing Hypertension in African American Adults. Ernest Johnson
      (R01HL50516),the Program Coordinator collaborated with Robert Schneider (R01HL51519). The
      objectives of their studies were complementary and the collaborative arrangements allowed
      them to determine the effectiveness of different approaches to stress management in
      comparison with a control group that was comparable at both sites. In addition, the
      treatment schedules in both studies resulted in identical contact time, length of
      interventions, expectations regarding treatment effectiveness, and follow-up assessment
      periods. As a result, a considerable degree of pooling of data for analysis was possible.

      Dr. Schneider's study was renewed in FY 1999 to conduct a randomized, single-blind,
      controlled, community-based trial involving 184 African American subjects with known
      coronary heart disease. Male and female subjects are enrolled at the on-going field site,
      Martin Luther King-Drew Medical Center in inner city Los Angeles. After baseline testing,
      subjects are randomized to either active stress reduction with TM or health education
      control-both in addition to usual medical care-and posttested after 12 months. The primary
      outcome is carotid artery atherosclerosis (IMT) measured non-invasively by quantitative
      B-mode ultrasonography. Secondary measures include traditional CVD risk factors (blood
      pressure, lipids, smoking, exercise), psychosocial stress, quality of life and cost
      effectiveness.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      No eligibility criteria
