TITLE:
      Treatment for Anxiety in Children
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to see if it is effective to treat children with anxiety
      disorders with fluvoxamine.

      Fluvoxamine has been successfully used to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in
      adults and children. Anxiety disorders other than OCD, such as generalized anxiety disorder,
      social phobia, or separation anxiety, are very common in youth and are not always responsive
      to behavioral therapies alone. These disorders may respond to fluvoxamine.

      A child will be evaluated for 3 weeks before he/she is assigned randomly (like tossing a
      coin) to receive either fluvoxamine or an inactive placebo for 8 weeks. After this
      double-blind phase (neither the child/parents nor the doctor know which treatment is being
      given), the child will have the option of continuing treatment during a 4-month open-label
      extension period (both the child/parents and the doctor know which the child is receiving).

      A child may be eligible for this study if he/she:

      Is 6 to 17 years old and has been diagnosed with an anxiety disorder (i.e., generalized
      anxiety disorder, social phobia, or separation anxiety).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To evaluate fluvoxamine in the treatment of children and adolescents with anxiety disorders.

      Fluvoxamine is a serotonin reuptake inhibitor that is FDA-approved for the treatment of
      obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in adults and children. Anxiety disorders other than OCD
      are very common in youth and are not always responsive to psychosocial therapies.
      Fluvoxamine is an alternative treatment.

      After a 3-week period of evaluation, patients meeting study entry criteria are randomized to
      receive either fluvoxamine or placebo for 8 weeks. After this double-blind phase, patients
      can enter a 4-month open-label extension.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      - Patients must have: DSM -IV diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, or
        separation anxiety.
