TITLE:
      Incidence, Severity and Treatment of Delirium in Cardiac Surgery Patients: A Before-after Study
SUMMARY:
      Delirium is a common yet under diagnosed condition in hospitalized patients, and the
      incidence have not previously been described in Danish cardiac surgery patients. The present
      study seeks to describe the incidence and duration of delirium in this group of patients,
      before and after the introduction of standardized screening tool and a guideline for
      treatment of delirium after cardiac surgery.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Delirium is a common yet under diagnosed condition in cardiac surgery patients, and may
      cause prolonged cognitive impairment and increased risk of complications. Patients are at
      risk of e.g. pulling catheters and lines and may fall attempting to get out of bed. The
      aging patient population present with many risk factors for developing delirium, but
      diagnostic tools have been few. Almost 50% present with hypoactive delirium, which is often
      not diagnosed, nor treated correctly. To optimize effect, treatment should be initiated
      early, maintained until clinical improvement is observed, and then tapered gradually.
      Recently, Delirium Observation Screening scale (DOS scale) was developed and validated in
      elective cardiac surgery patients in the Netherlands, with interesting results. This
      encouraged us to evaluate the effects of systematic delirium screening and treatment in
      cardiac surgery patients. To our knowledge, no prior studies have evaluated use of DOS scale
      in this context.

      OBJECTIVES To evaluate the incidence and severity of delirium, and the effects of
      standardized treatment in a population of Danish cardiac surgery patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  adult patients admitted for cardiac surgery at department of cardiothoracic surgery,
             Rigshospitalet, denmark

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  patients under age 18,

          -  patients that died within 24 hours after admission.
