TITLE:
      dnaJ Peptide for Relieving Rheumatoid Arthritis
SUMMARY:
      A small protein called dnaJ peptide may help people with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by
      preventing their immune system cells from attacking their own tissues. The purpose of this
      study is to determine if small amounts of dnaJ peptide can "re-educate" immune cells in
      people with RA so that the cells stop attacking joint tissues.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Immune modulation is a promising new approach for the treatment of RA. Studies have shown
      that immune cells in the joints of people in the early stages of RA react strongly against
      dnaJ peptides from bacteria. These immune cells may also cross-react with human dnaJ
      peptides in the joints to cause inflammation. dnaJ may help RA by "re-educating" the immune
      system and dampening the abnormal inflammatory immune response in RA.

      This study will last 7 months. Participants will be randomly assigned to receive either dnaJ
      or placebo by mouth. At screening, participants will have medical history, physical, and
      medication assessment. At screening, at 6 study visits every month after the start of
      treatment, and at 1 month follow-up, participants will have a joint exam, blood and urine
      collection, and will fill out a questionnaire about their condition.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Active rheumatoid arthritis as defined by the revised American College of
             Rheumatology (ACR) 1987 criteria. Evidence of active disease will be based on at
             least six swollen or nine tender joints.

          -  Diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis of less than 5 years

          -  Reactivity to dnaJ

          -  Agree to use acceptable methods of contraception

          -  Able to understand and sign informed consent

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients taking more 7.5 mg of prednisone or disease modifying agents other than
             hydrochloroquine or sulfasalazine (i.e., gold, penicillamine, azathioprine,
             cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, cyclosporine, or anti-TNF agents)

          -  Serum creatinine greater than 1.5 mg/dl

          -  SGOT less than SGPT

          -  Alkaline phosphatase greater than 2 times age/sex adjusted normal values

          -  Hematocrit of less than 30

          -  Platelets less than 130,000

          -  History of lymphoma

          -  Any active malignancy or cancer requiring treatment in the last 5 years, except for
             nonmelanoma skin cancers and carcinoma of the cervix in situ

          -  Medical or psychiatric condition or active serious infection

          -  Pregnant or breastfeeding
