TITLE:
      Left vs. Right Radial Approach for Routine Catheterization of Heart Transplant Patients
SUMMARY:
      Orthotopic heart transplantation is a well established therapeutic measure for end stage
      heart failure, leading to significant improvements in survival and quality of life. In the
      routine clinical practice, orthotopic heart transplantation patients receive periodic
      cardiac catheterization for early detection of allograft vascular disease.

      The coronary angiography of these patients is characterized for several technical
      difficulties, generally related to the presence of the aortotomy with anomalous implantation
      of the coronary ostia and to the orthotopic position of the allograft. For these reasons,
      trans femoral approach is usually preferred. In the last two decades, trans radial approach
      for coronary angiography emerged to be effective, safe and able to improve patient comfort.
      However, there is no universal consensus on the optimal choice of radial access from either
      the left or the right artery. Currently, this choice is largely dependent on the operator's
      preference. The trans right radial approach is generally preferred in routine clinical
      practice mainly due to its easier catheter manipulation for the operators from patient's
      right side, and the current design of radial compression devices for the right wrist in
      medical market. As such, a major barrier to prevent the wide adoption of the left radial
      access lies in some difficulty to reach the left wrist leaning over the patient,
      particularly for shorter operators or in obese patients. However, a great deal of attention
      has been recently directed toward the trans left radial access, as it has an important
      anatomical advantage due to the vascular anatomy of epiaortic vessels with a straighter
      route to the left coronary ostium, which could also reduce the risk of cerebrovascular
      complications.

      However, no data are available about the performance of trans left radial or trans-right
      radial approach in coronary angiography orthotopic heart transplantation patients. However,
      in this particular setting of patients, the left radial approach might reduce the technical
      difficulties related to the anatomical variations.

      In this single centre, prospective, randomized study, we sought to compare trans right
      radial versus trans left radial approach in terms of amount of contrast medium, radiation
      exposure, number of catheters used, cross over to the other access site rate and local and
      systemic complications in orthotopic heart transplantation patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Orthotopic heart transplantation is a well established therapeutic measure for end stage
      heart failure, leading to significant improvements in survival and quality of life.
      Allograft vascular disease remains the most frequent cause of morbidity and mortality after
      orthotopic heart transplantation, with angiographic evidence of allograft vascular disease
      around 50% of patients at 5- to 15-year follow-up. In the routine clinical practice,
      orthotopic heart transplantation patients receive periodic cardiac catheterization for early
      detection of allograft vascular disease.

      The coronary angiography of these patients is characterized for several technical
      difficulties, generally related to the presence of the aortotomy with anomalous implantation
      of the coronary ostia and to the orthotopic position of the allograft. For these reasons,
      trans femoral approach is usually preferred. In the last two decades, trans radial approach
      for coronary angiography emerged to be effective, safe and able to improve patient comfort.
      However, there is no universal consensus about the optimal choice of radial access from
      either the left or the right artery. Currently, this choice is largely dependent on the
      operator's preference. The trans-right-radial approach is generally preferred in routine
      clinical practice mainly due to its easier catheter manipulation for the operators from
      patient's right side, and the current design of radial compression devices for the right
      wrist in medical market. As such, a major barrier to prevent the wide adoption of the left
      radial access lies in some difficulty to reach the left wrist leaning over the patient,
      particularly for shorter operators or in obese patients. However, a great deal of attention
      has been recently directed toward the trans-left-radial access, as it has an important
      anatomical advantage due to the vascular anatomy of epiaortic vessels with a straighter
      route to the left coronary ostium, which could also reduce the risk of cerebrovascular
      complications.

      In this context, a recent metanalysis demonstrated that trans left radial access is
      preferable to trans-right-radial approach in terms of fluoroscopy time and contrast use for
      the diagnostic or interventional coronary procedures. Moreover, as expected, there was an
      indication of lowered failure rate of radial access from the left than the right. No data
      are available about the performance of trans left radial access or trans right radial
      approach in coronary angiography of orthotopic heart transplantation patients. However, in
      this particular setting of patients, the trans-left-radial access might reduce the technical
      difficulties related to the anatomical variations.

      In this single-centre, prospective, randomized study, we sought to compare trans right
      radial approach versus trans-left-radial access in terms of amount of contrast medium,
      radiation exposure, number of catheters used, cross-over to the other access site rate and
      local and systemic complications in orthotopic heart transplantation patients.

      Study objectives

        1. To demonstrate the superiority of trans left radial access, compared to trans right
           radial approach during coronary angiography of orthotopic heart transplantation
           patients, in terms of amount of contrast medium, radiation exposure, number of
           catheters used, cross-over to other access site rate local and systemic complications

        2. To determine the relationship of operator experience with radiation exposure to answer
           the question that whether we can minimize fluoroscopy time with increased operator
           experience ("post-hoc analysis");

        3. To assess the cost effectiveness of coronary angiography performed by trans right
           radial approach versus trans left radial access ("post hoc analysis").

      Method section Clinical data A detailed anamnesis of each trial participant will be
      collected: age, gender, weight, high, BMI, coronary risk factors (hypertension, dyslipemia,
      diabetes mellitus, smoking habit, obesity), cause of transplantation, date of
      transplantation, current clinical status and therapy, ejection fraction, renal function and
      complete blood count. In particular, creatinine values will be evaluated at baseline, 3-4
      days after the interventional procedure and, if impaired, also at 7-10 days from the
      coronary angiography.

      Procedure Participating interventional cardiologists will be high-volume radial operators
      (meeting minimal proficiency criteria of ≥50% interventional cases by radial approach per
      year). Each variable will be analyzed separately in consultants, fellows, and post graduate
      fellows (trainees). In particular, participating interventional cardiologists will be
      divided in well experienced radial operators (defined as the person who has performed >500
      radial procedures including >200 procedures in a recent year), less experienced (the person
      who has done 200-500 radial procedures in a recent year), and trainee (the person who has
      done <200 radial procedures). The procedures will be performed according to current
      guidelines. At the end of the coronary angiography, after introducer removal, a hand wrist
      compression device (TR Band, Terumo) will be used in the both group.

      The procedural time was measured from the arterial puncture up to vascular hemostasis.

      The radiation exposure will be measured using:

        1. dose area product meters, which reflects both the dose of radiation administered and
           the area on the patient it is administered to. This is a continuous variable measured
           in microgray meter squared (μGym2).

        2. fluoroscopy time, which reflects the length of time the patient and operator are
           exposed to radiation;

        3. total dose, measured in milligray (mGy), administered from the angiography system.

      The amount of contrast medium for each procedure will be recorded. The number and type of
      catheters employed as well as the number and the type of wires used in the interventional
      procedure will be detected.

      The cross-over to other access site were also collected. In addition, systemic and vascular
      complications will be evaluated pre-discharge.

      In particular, vascular complications will be defined as haemoglobin loss at least 2 mmol/l,
      necessity of a blood transfusion and vascular repair, hematoma, pseudoaneurysm and arterial
      occlusion. The renal failure after procedure will be defined as a raise in serum values of
      creatinine ≥ 0.5 mg/dl or ≥ 25% within 24-72 hours after the exposure to the contrast
      medium.

      Statistical Analysis

      All clinical and procedural characteristics will be summarized as mean ± Standard Deviation
      for continuous variables with normal distribution, median (interquartile range) for those
      continuous but with skewed distribution, and number (percentage) for categorical variables;
      The Student t, Mann-Whitney U and Fisher exact tests will be computed when appropriate for
      bivariate analyses. Firstly, all analyses will be conducted on intention to treat basis,
      regardless possible access site cross-over. Afterwards, efficacy subset analyses will be
      performed. A two-tailed p-value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. Data
      will be analyzed using SPSS for Windows version 20.0 software (SPSS Inc. Chicago, USA). The
      sample size will be calculated in order to provide, with a 80% power, the difference of 20
      ml with a Standard Deviation of ± 30 of amount of contrast dose (alpha value=0.05) between
      trans-left-radial access vs. trans-right-radial access.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria: eligible transplanted patients scheduled for a routine coronary
        angiography with age >18 years old.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. chronic renal insufficiency (creatinine >2.0 mg/dl) with the potential necessity of
             using the radial artery as a native fistula will be considered one of the exclusion
             criteria;

          2. in case of an abnormal or doubtful bilateral Allen's test, a pletysmography will be
             done. The presence of a type A or B curve will be considered a marker of adequate
             hand collaterals and the procedure will be able by this access. Only the presence of
             bilateral type C or D curves will be considered a contraindication to trans radial
             approach.
