TITLE:
      Cholesterol-Lowering Atherosclerosis Study (CLAS)
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether combined therapy with the lipid lowering agents colestipol
      hydrochloride plus niacin would produce significant change in coronary, carotid, and femoral
      artery atherosclerosis and coronary bypass graft lesions as determined by angiography. Also,
      to determine possible correlations between lesion changes and plasma lipid and lipoprotein
      cholesterol levels and to explore interrelationships of atherosclerosis change in femoral,
      coronary, and carotid arteries.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary Prevention Trial and the Coronary Drug Project
      had shown that morbidity and mortality from ischemic heart disease were reduced by blood
      cholesterol-lowering therapy. Although blood cholesterol reduction ameliorated experimental
      atherosclerosis in animal models, the two largest human studies with angiographic
      observation of arterial lesion change, the NHLBI Type II Coronary Intervention Study and a
      study by Cohn et al, had not demonstrated significant treatment effects. Favorable, but
      inconclusive, treatment trends were observed in four unrandomized angiographic trials and
      one trial too small for evaluation of randomized groups.

      The clinical trial was supported by a subproject within a program project grant.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      CLAS-I was randomized and selectively-blinded. Screening for the trial consisted of five
      clinic visits, at which baseline data, including angiographic data, were obtained and a
      prerandomization trial of the study drugs was conducted. One hundred eighty-eighty subjects
      were randomized to either 30 grams (g) of colestipol hydrochloride plus 3 to 12 g of niacin
      daily or to placebo. Both groups received diet intervention. The drug group received less
      than 125 milligrams (mg) of cholesterol daily, 22 percent of energy as fat, 10 percent as
      polyunsaturated fat, and 4 percent as saturated fat. The placebo group received less than
      250 mg of cholesterol per day, 26 percent of energy as fat, 10 percent as polyunsaturated
      fat, and 5 percent as saturated fat. The different diet composition for drug and placebo
      groups was to enhance the differential in blood cholesterol responses between the two
      groups. Study subjects and clinic staff were blinded to the prerandomization study drug
      trial lipid responses. Subjects were blinded to treatment assignments. Subjects and staff
      were not blinded to on-trial lipid values. The primary endpoint, the global change score,
      was change in atherosclerosis observed by angiography of native coronary arteries and aorta
      coronary bypass grafts. Evaluation of study end-points was performed by staff and
      consultants who were blinded to treatment group assignments, as well as to the temporal
      ordering of angiographic data. Subjects were seen monthly for the first six months and then
      at two-month intervals. A repeat angiogram was performed at two years. Of the 188 randomized
      subjects, 162 completed the study.

      On completion of CLAS-I, participants not requiring further bypass surgery were invited to
      continue in CLAS-II for an additional two years on their previously assigned treatment.
      Blinded study methods were maintained; there was no crossover between treatments. One
      hundred thirty-eight subjects continued in CLAS-II; 103 completed a third angiogram before
      the CLAS-I outcome was known and CLAS-II terminated. The CLAS-II clinical procedures, lipid,
      lipoprotein-cholesterol, and apolipoprotein analyses were the same as in CLAS-I. The CLAS-II
      angiographic and file evaluation procedures exactly replicated those in CLAS-I.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Non-smoking men, ages 40 to 59, with progressive atherosclerosis confirmed by angiography,
        who had coronary bypass surgery at least three months prior to the study admission date,
        and who had entry fasting blood cholesterol levels in the range of 185
