TITLE:
      Preventing Child Abuse in Infants
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to compare 2 approaches (interventions) to prevent child-abuse
      (maltreatment) in infants: Psychoeducational Home Visitation (PHV) vs Infant-Parent
      Psychotherapy (IPP). Non-maltreated infants and their mothers are studied as a comparison
      group.

      Twelve-month-old infants and their mothers are assigned randomly (like tossing a coin) to
      receive 1 of 3 types of intervention for 12 months: 1) Services normally available in the
      community when a family is reported for child maltreatment (Child Protective Services, CPS);
      2) CPS involvement plus weekly PHV; 3) CPS involvement plus weekly IPP. Intervention will be
      provided until the infant's second birthday. All mother-infant pairs (including comparison
      non-maltreated infants and their mothers) will be assessed when the infant is 12, 18, 24,
      36, and 48 months old. Assessments will look at the effectiveness of the intervention in
      preventing child maltreatment, improving parenting, and reducing future abuse. The study
      will last for 3 years.

      Eligibility includes a mother and her 12-month-old child that has been abused by her (the
      mother) or the father. (Non-maltreated infants and their mothers also will be enrolled.)
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To evaluate the relative effectiveness of 2 theoretically-informed approaches to preventing
      the adverse sequelae of maltreatment in infants: Psychoeducational Home Visitation (PHV) and
      Infant-Parent Psychotherapy (IPP). Non-maltreated infants and their mothers serve as a
      comparison.

      Maltreated infants and their mothers are randomly assigned to 1 of 3 types of intervention
      for 12 months: 1) Services routinely available in the community when a family is reported
      for child maltreatment (Child Protective Services, CPS); 2) CPS involvement plus weekly PHV;
      3) CPS involvement plus weekly IPP. Intervention is provided until the infant's second
      birthday. All mother-infant dyads (including comparison non-maltreated infants and their
      mothers) participate in baseline assessments at the infant's age of 12 months. Subsequent
      assessments occur at 18, 24, 36, and 48 months of age. Assessments measure three major
      areas: 1) family-ecological variables; 2) maternal functioning and parenting; and 3) child
      functioning and stage-salient issues. CPS records are monitored annually across all groups
      to determine whether any reports of maltreatment have been filed.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Participants must have:

        Infants that have been maltreated by their biological caregiver during their first year of
        life and who continue to reside with their maternal caregiver. (Non-maltreated infants and
        their mothers will also be enrolled.)
