TITLE:
      Extracorporeal Support for Respiratory Insufficiency (ECMO)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate indications for the use and efficacy of extracorporeal membrane oxygenators
      (ECMO's) for the support of patients with potentially reversible acute respiratory failure.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The report of the Task Force on Respiratory Diseases identified a clinical syndrome of acute
      respiratory insufficiency (ARI) and estimated that approximately 60,000 Americans die of ARI
      yearly. ARI was not precisely defined; indeed, the Task Force realized that pathologists do
      not recognize ARI. The Task Force pointed out that no diagnostic tests for early detection
      of ARI exist, that the incidence and prevalence of the disease are not known, and that
      existing therapy is supportive and nonspecific (diuretics, corticosteroids, etc.). The
      pathogenesis of the syndrome, the mechanism of interstitial edema, the defenses of the lung
      against agents causing ARI, and the ultrastructural pathology and natural history of the
      disease were virtually unknown. The Task Force indicated a need for Respiratory Care Centers
      with highly trained personnel that could reduce mortality from ARI.

      This clinical trial grew out of the Task Force report. Nine participating centers defined
      ARI in clinical and physiological terms and agreed to a prospective randomized study for 3
      years to compare treatment of severe ARI by conventional means with treatment by
      extracorporeal membrane oxygenators.

      Animal studies have shown that ECMO's can provide one to two weeks' support for the lungs
      without serious blood damage, in contrast to bubble oxygenators, which allow complete
      pulmonary bypass for approximately 6 hours, after which severe blood damage occurs at the
      direct blood-gas interface. If patients with hypoxia secondary to acute reversible lung
      injury can be supported with ECMO's until the lung lesion heals, improvement in survival
      rates and avoidance of the hazards of conventional therapy may result. The trial, now
      completed, was conducted at nine clinical centers in the United States.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, non-blind, fixed sample; 90 eligible patients were randomly assigned to a group
      receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation plus conventional therapy or to a group
      receiving conventional therapy.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 12 to 65, not stratified as to ethnic group, who had potentially
        reversible acute respiratory failure.
