TITLE:
      Phone-Based Postpartum Continuing Care for Smoking Cessation
SUMMARY:
      Smoking is a leading cause of death and other negative health outcomes. While a high
      percentage of women quit smoking during pregnancy, the majority relapse in the first 6
      months postpartum. We propose developing and pilot testing a phone-based postpartum
      continuing care (PPCC) protocol based on existing evidence-based approaches to increase
      smoking cessation, reduce relapse, increase early re-intervention, and reduce infant
      exposure to environmental tobacco smoke in the postpartum period.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The large majority of women who quit smoking during pregnancy relapse in the first six
      months postpartum, highlighting a need for effective postpartum continuing care that
      supports women through the challenging postpartum period when stress is high and motivation
      to stay quit may decline. Existing relapse prevention interventions (typically delivered
      during pregnancy) have been found to be of little benefit during the postpartum period,
      suggesting the need for a more formal continuing care approach. Phone-based protocols for
      smoking cessation have been widely disseminated and effective because they address the need
      for flexible access, but are passive and not typically utilized by women in the postpartum
      period.

      The proposed pilot study will develop and test a Phone-based Postpartum Continuing Care
      (PPCC) model that draws from existing evidence-based protocols--the 5 A's and Recovery
      Management Checkups (RMC)-- shown to be effective with other populations. The experimental
      PPCC will reinforce the importance of abstinence, relapse prevention, and reduced smoking
      through proactive re-intervention (i.e., RMC) with the 5 A's at times when postpartum women
      are more likely to relapse, and provide education and monitoring of the infant's direct and
      indirect exposure to nicotine through breastfeeding and secondhand smoke. We will evaluate
      PPCC's effectiveness relative to a passive referral to a 24/7 hotline, which is current
      standard care.

      Approximately one hundred thirty women in their first or second trimester of pregnancy who
      were nicotine-dependent in the past year, currently smoke, or quit within the past 90 days
      will be recruited at their first prenatal appointment at the Maryland Women's Center (MWC)
      in Baltimore, Maryland. All women will receive the clinic's standard of care for smoking
      cessation--the 5 A's --during pregnancy from their physician. Half will be randomly assigned
      to an experimental group getting PPCC for 6 months postpartum and half to a control group
      receiving only a referral to a passive 24/7 state quit line postpartum. It is expected that
      in the 6 months following childbirth women in the experimental PPCC (relative to those in
      the control group) will: a) smoke fewer cigarettes, b) smoke fewer days, c) go longer before
      postpartum relapse, d) have less time between relapse and talking to a health professional
      about smoking, e) have less time between relapse and resumption of abstinence , f) smoke
      fewer times while breastfeeding, g) smoke fewer times while in the same room as the infant,
      and h) reduce their infant's cotinine levels.

      The aims of this pilot project are to develop PPCC from existing evidence-based approaches,
      demonstrate the feasibility of implementing the PPCC intervention with at least 80%
      compliance and at least 80% follow-up at each wave, and evaluate the effect size associated
      with receiving standard care vs. standard care + PPCC in order to understand the promise of
      and appropriate power required for a larger clinical trial.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  first or second trimester of pregnancy

          -  age 18 or older

          -  self-reported tobacco use in the past 90 days or nicotine-dependence in the past year

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  intend to terminate their pregnancy

          -  intend to move out of the city within the next 12 months

          -  are unable to provide informed consent and participate in English
