TITLE:
      Preventing the Return of Depression in Elderly Patients
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to compare the effectiveness of two doses of nortriptyline in
      elderly patients whose depression returned after stopping treatment. Nortriptyline is an
      antidepressant.

      This study enrolls patients who were treated for depression in an earlier research study and
      whose depression has returned since stopping treatment. Patients are treated for 4 months to
      bring the depression under control. Patients are then assigned randomly (like tossing a
      coin) to receive either the full dose of nortriptyline or half the usual dose of
      nortriptyline. Patients continue taking nortriptyline for 2 years or until a major
      depression returns. Throughout the study, patients are monitored for symptoms of depression
      and other side effects.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To determine whether elderly (60-80 years old) depressed patients who cannot sustain a
      remission without medication must be maintained at full acute-treatment dose. To compare the
      efficacy of full-dose vs half-dose nortriptyline (NT) in preventing recurrences of major
      depression in the elderly. To determine whether those patients who experience a recurrence
      while in a maintenance placebo condition (Study I) require 100 percent of their
      acute-treatment dose of NT to prevent subsequent recurrences or can be successfully
      maintained on 50 percent of their acute-treatment dose (Study II).

      Investigators expect a pool of 60 patients from Study I to become eligible for Study II (the
      full-dose/half-dose maintenance trial). After treatment of the recurrence and following 16
      weeks of stabilization therapy, patients are randomized to 1 of 2 maintenance therapy cells:
      full-dose NT or half-dose NT. Maintenance lasts 2 years or until recurrence of major
      depression. The following are assessed: differences in recurrence rates and time to
      recurrence under full-dose vs half-dose conditions; differences in symptomatic ratings of
      depression, suicidal ideation, social adjustment, and side effects; and differences in
      compliance rates as determined by variability in level-to-dose (L/D) ratios. Exploratory
      data analyses are used to generate a hypothetical profile of elderly patients who can remain
      well on half-dose maintenance nortriptyline.

      For information on related studies, please follow these links:

      http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00178100

      http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00177671
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Patients must have:

        Recurrence of major depression while in a maintenance placebo condition in the currently
        funded maintenance therapy protocol (Study I).
