TITLE:
      Hematopoietic Stem Cell Dysfunction in the Elderly After Severe Injury
SUMMARY:
      Traumatic injury is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in young adults, and remains
      a substantial economic and health care burden. Despite decades of promising preclinical and
      clinical investigations in trauma, investigators understanding of these entities is still
      incomplete, and few therapies have shown success. During severe trauma, bone marrow
      granulocyte stores are rapidly released into the peripheral circulation. This release
      subsequently induces the expansion and repopulation of empty or evacuated space by
      hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Although the patient experiences an early loss of bone
      marrow myeloid-derived cells, stem cell expansion is largely skewed towards the repopulation
      of the myeloid lineage/compartment. The hypothesis is that this 'emergency myelopoiesis' is
      critical for the survival of the severely traumatized and further, failure of the emergency
      myelopoietic response is associated with global immunosuppression and susceptibility to
      secondary infection. Also, identifying the release of myeloid derived suppressor cells
      (MDSCs) in the circulation of human severe trauma subjects. This process is driven by HSCs
      in the bone marrow of trauma subjects. Additionally, MDSCs may have a profound effect on the
      nutritional status of the host. The appearance of these MDSCs after trauma is associated
      with a loss of muscle tissue in these subjects. This muscle loss and possible increased
      catabolism have huge effects on long term outcomes for these subjects. It is the
      investigator's goal to understand the differences that occur in these in HSCs and muscle
      cells as opposed to non-injured and non-infected controls. This work will lead to a better
      understanding of the myelopoietic and catabolic response following trauma.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This is a prospective study to understand how trauma injuries changes the hematopoeitic stem
      cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow and muscle cells after trauma injury in elderly subjects is
      different when compared to non-injured subjects.

      There will be three groups for this study: 1) Elective hip surgery subjects, 2) Trauma
      subjects and 3) deidentified bone marrow of healthy controls.

      Samples of bone marrow, muscle tissue, and a blood sample will be collected at the time of
      surgery. The deidentified bone marrow of healthy controls will come from a tissue bank.

      The blood will be used to perform PB colony assays, ELISAs to test for the following
      parameters: EPO, G-CSF, Reticulocyte, iron levels and cytokines and inflammatory markers.

      The bone marrow, muscle tissue, blood samples will be processed and sorted to isolate
      hematopoeitic stem cells for genomic content to determine genomic expression, oxidative
      stress, mitochondrial activity, apoptosis, autophagy, analysis of circulating erythroid
      progenitor cells, reticulocytes, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor assays,
      erythropoietin and iron levels.

      Clinical data and hemodynamic measurements will be collected daily while subjects are
      hospitalized and trauma surgery subjects will be followed to evaluate for malunion and
      subsequent additional surgical procedures for repair.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Severe Trauma Population

        Inclusion criteria will be:

          1. All adults (age ≥18)

          2. Blunt and/or penetrating trauma patients with hemorrhagic shock, defined by either a
             systolic BP (SBP) <90 mm Hg or base deficit (BD) <-6 meq.

          3. Ability to obtain Informed Consent prior to OR repair of injury.

        Exclusion Criteria will be:

          1. Patients not expected to survive greater than 48 hours.

          2. Prisoners.

          3. Pregnancy.

          4. Transfer from another hospital.

          5. Patients receiving chronic corticosteroids or immunosuppression therapies.

          6. Previous bone marrow transplantation.

          7. Patients with End Stage Renal Disease.

          8. Patients with any pre-existing hematological disease.

        Elective Hip Repair Population

        Inclusion criteria will be:

          1. All adults (age ≥18)

          2. Patient undergoing elective hip repair for non-infectious reasons.

          3. Ability to obtain Informed Consent prior to operation.

        Exclusion Criteria will be:

          1. Pregnancy.

          2. Prisoners.

          3. Patients receiving chronic corticosteroids or immunosuppression therapies.

          4. Previous Chemotherapy or Radiation.

          5. Pre-existing conditions such as pathological fractures, cancer, history of HIV, or
             history of connective tissue disease.

          6. Previous bone marrow transplantation.

          7. Patients with End Stage Renal Disease.

          8. Patients with any pre-existing hematological disease.
