TITLE:
      Trial of Nonpharmacologic Interventions in Elderly (TONE)
SUMMARY:
      To test the efficacy of weight loss and sodium restriction, alone and combined, in
      maintaining the normotensive state following withdrawal of antihypertensive medications in
      an elderly cohort. Conducted in collaboration with the National Institute on Aging.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      An estimated 30 to 40 percent of elderly persons are treated with blood pressure
      medications. The efficacy of blood pressure drug therapy in older patients with diastolic or
      combined diastolic/systolic hypertension is well proven, but such therapy can adversely
      affect quality of life and biochemical profile. In 1992 when the study started, there was a
      compelling rationale to identify what proportion of medicated, well-controlled elderly
      hypertensives could be maintained long-term or greater than 30 months in the normotensive
      state following withdrawal of blood pressure medications. There was also a need to determine
      whether nonpharmacologic therapy could significantly increase the proportion with a
      successful outcome.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized. A total of 585 overweight subjects were assigned in a 2 x 2 factorial design to
      weight loss, sodium reduction, combined weight loss and sodium reduction, or usual
      life-style control. The remaining 390 subjects of normal weight were assigned in a 2-armed
      design to a sodium reduction or an attention control group. The control groups were engaged
      in a series of non-blood pressure related health encounters designed to control for
      non-specific effects of groups contacts. Withdrawal of antihypertensive medication was
      attempted following three months of intervention. The primary endpoint was a blood pressure
      of 150/90 mm Hg or greater, resumption of antihypertensive drug therapy, or the occurrence
      of a blood pressure-related clinical complication during two to three years of follow-up.
      Recruitment ended in June, 1994. Follow-up ended in December, 1995. NHLBI support for the
      trial ended in March, 1997. The NIA supported the Coordinating Center and two clinical
      centers through February 1998.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women with a systolic blood pressure of less than 145 mm Hg and diastolic blood
        pressure of less than 85 mm Hg on single-drug therapy.
