TITLE:
      Naltrexone Treatment of Alcohol Dependence
SUMMARY:
      The long-range goal of this ongoing research program is to find more effective treatments
      for alcohol dependence by combining medication with the appropriate psychosocial support.
      This proposal has three specific aims: (1) to compare the effectiveness of naltrexone
      (Revia) in three types of treatment settings; (2) to assess the effects of psychosocial
      support on medication compliance and treatment retention; and (3) to investigate the
      individual characteristics that may predict who is likely to benefit from additional
      psychosocial support versus simple medication management.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for current diagnosis of alcohol dependence.

          -  Subjects used more than 15 standard alcohol drinks (average)/week with at least 1 day
             of 5 or more drinks in the past 30 days.

          -  Successful completion of medical detoxification.

          -  Lives within a commutable distance to the Treatment Research Center and agrees to
             follow-up visits.

          -  Understands and signs the informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Current diagnosis of any substance dependence other than alcohol, nicotine, or
             marijuana.

          -  Evidence of opiate use in the past 30 days.

          -  Current treatment with psychotropic medications, including disulfiram (Antabuse)
             (excluding short-term use of benzodiazepines for detoxification).

          -  History of unstable or serious medical illness, including need for opioid analgesics.

          -  Severe physical or medical illnesses such as AIDS, active hepatitis, significant
             hepatocellular injury as evidenced by elevated bilirubin levels, and current severe
             psychiatric symptoms.

          -  Use of an investigation medication in the past 30 days.

          -  Female subjects who are pregnant, nursing, or not using reliable method of
             contraception.
