TITLE:
      Randomized Trial of Dietary Intervention Therapy in Obese Hypertensives (DITOH)
SUMMARY:
      To determine the effects on blood pressure of dietary intervention, restricting caloric
      intake to 600 calories per day for 16 weeks compared to a control diet of 1200 calories per
      day in obese hypertensives. Secondary aims included a study of psychological characteristics
      at baseline and during the weight loss and maintenance phases of the study.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Hypertension is a highly prevalent disorder contributing to a large proportion of
      cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the United States. Although drug therapy of
      elevated blood pressure can reduce the risks of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, such
      therapy constitutes significant expense for individuals over long periods of time as well as
      large national expenditures. In addition, the side effects of drug therapy may be
      significant. DITOH would provide much needed information concerning the effects of various
      means of weight reduction on blood pressure as possible definitive therapy for hypertension
      or as an approach which could be combined with reduced drug dosages.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized. After three weeks on a control diet, subjects were randomized to the Protein
      Sparing Modified Fast Diet which provided 600 calories per day (1.5 grams per kilogram of
      ideal body weight of high quality protein plus 19 grams of fat) or to a 1200 calorie per day
      Balanced Deficit Diet. After 16 weeks in the weight-loss phase, subjects entered the
      maintenance program for 20 weeks. Both diets were supplemented with vitamins, minerals, and
      fluids. The Protein Sparing Modified Fast Diet was supplemented with 5 grams of salt given
      as bouillon to equal the salt intake of the Balanced Deficit Diet. Patients were followed
      for 24 months after the end of the weight loss phase. The primary endpoint was change in
      diastolic blood pressure. Individuals who continued to have diastolic pressures above 104 mm
      Hg following the initial 16 week treatment period were treated with antihypertensive drugs.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 25 to 55. Subjects were obese, weighing between 130 and 210 percent of
        ideal body weight. Subjects had diastolic blood pressures between 90 and 105 mm Hg and
        were not on antihypertensive medications.
