TITLE:
      A Randomized Study of Activity, Safety, and Tolerance of Oral Ro 24-7429 (Tat Antagonist) in Patients With HIV Infection
SUMMARY:
      To study the anti-HIV activity of the various doses of Ro 24-7429 monotherapy based on
      virologic and immunologic endpoints. To study the safety and tolerance of Ro 24-7429. To
      explore relationships between exposure to Ro 24-7429 and its metabolites and antiviral
      activity and drug toxicity. To determine a safe, tolerable, and active dose regimen of Ro
      24-7429, and to make preliminary observations of Ro 24-7429 in combination with another
      antiretroviral nucleoside.

      The HIV genome contains a number of genes that regulate viral replication. Control of the
      activity of these genes and their encoded proteins represents a potential target for
      development of new antiretroviral drugs. The tat (transactivator of transcription of HIV)
      antagonist Ro 24-7429 is the first compound for clinical testing that utilizes this approach
      for therapy of HIV infection.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The HIV genome contains a number of genes that regulate viral replication. Control of the
      activity of these genes and their encoded proteins represents a potential target for
      development of new antiretroviral drugs. The tat (transactivator of transcription of HIV)
      antagonist Ro 24-7429 is the first compound for clinical testing that utilizes this approach
      for therapy of HIV infection.

      Ninety-six patients (four treatment arms of 24 patients each) are randomized to receive oral
      Ro 24-7429 at 1 of 3 doses or nucleoside control (either zidovudine or didanosine). The
      study will be blinded only for the arms receiving Ro 24-7429. Treatment continues for 12
      weeks. After 12 weeks, patients on the nucleoside control arm receive the highest tolerated
      dose of Ro 24-7429 in addition to their nucleoside.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Chemoprophylaxis for P. carinii pneumonia, TB, and mucocutaneous candidiasis.

          -  Methadone maintenance.

          -  Hormonal contraceptives.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV-1 seropositivity.

          -  CD4 count 50 - 500 cells/mm3.

          -  Life expectancy of at least 24 weeks.

          -  Stable weight (+/- 2 kg) by 28 days prior to study entry (by history).

        NOTE:

          -  At least 50 percent of patients must be p24 antigen positive (>= 50 pg/ml).

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms and conditions are excluded:

          -  Known or suspected hypersensitivity to benzodiazepines.

          -  Presence of any malignancy other than basal cell carcinoma or limited cutaneous
             Kaposi's sarcoma (defined as no more than five lesions with no mucosal involvement).

          -  Ongoing diarrhea, defined as more than 2 liquid stools per day.

          -  History, physical exam, or laboratory results consistent with a subclinical
             AIDS-defining opportunistic infection.

          -  Grade 2 or greater signs and symptoms of AIDS Dementia Complex.

          -  Evidence of clinically significant cardiac, respiratory, hepatic, gastrointestinal,
             endocrine, hematologic, psychiatric, neurologic, dermatologic, or allergic disease.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Chronic suppressive therapy for CMV, MAI, toxoplasmosis, cryptococcosis,
             cryptosporidiosis, coccidioidomycosis, and histoplasmosis.

          -  ddC, ddI, AZT (except for control groups) or other experimental antiretrovirals or
             immunomodulating agents.

          -  Other medications excluded from the study.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of serious adverse reactions to benzodiazepines.

          -  History of intolerance to AZT at 600 mg/day or less or ddI at 400 mg/day or less.

          -  History of unexplained fever, defined as a temperature of 38.5 deg C or greater with
             or without night sweats for more than 7 of the past 28 days.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Benzodiazepines within 14 days prior to study entry.

        Active drug or alcohol abuse that would interfere with study compliance.
