TITLE:
      A Multicenter, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Double-Blind Trial to Evaluate the Safety and Immunogenicity of a Recombinant Vaccinia-HIV-1 IIIB Env/Gag/Pol Vaccine (TBC-3B)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate, in healthy HIV-1 seronegative vaccinia-immune and vaccinia-naive volunteers,
      the safety and immunogenicity of an HIV-1 candidate vaccine (TBC-3B) consisting of a live
      recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the env, gag, and pol genes of HIV-1 IIIB strain. To
      evaluate the potential of boosting with one of a variety of HIV-1 recombinant subunit,
      peptide, or pseudovirion vaccines, if available, to augment the immune responses of the
      vaccinees.

      Antigenic drift, defined as the genetic variation of the HIV-1 envelope gene that results in
      antigenic variation during natural infection, may confound attempts to achieve protective
      immunity using a vaccine based solely on HIV-1 envelope proteins. Inclusion of conserved
      core and polymerase proteins along with envelope protein in a candidate vaccine may address
      some of the problems with antigenic variability. A prime-boost immunization approach using a
      novel priming immunogen expressing env, gag, and pol genes of the HIV-1 IIIB strain will be
      attempted in this study.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Antigenic drift, defined as the genetic variation of the HIV-1 envelope gene that results in
      antigenic variation during natural infection, may confound attempts to achieve protective
      immunity using a vaccine based solely on HIV-1 envelope proteins. Inclusion of conserved
      core and polymerase proteins along with envelope protein in a candidate vaccine may address
      some of the problems with antigenic variability. A prime-boost immunization approach using a
      novel priming immunogen expressing env, gag, and pol genes of the HIV-1 IIIB strain will be
      attempted in this study.

      In Part I, vaccinia-immune volunteers are randomized to one of two regimens. Group A
      receives priming with TBC-3B on days 0 and 56, followed by boosting on day 224 (8 months)
      with one of the following: TBC-3B, an alternative immunogen such as pseudovirion particles
      or a recombinant HIV-1 subunit or peptide vaccine, or placebo. Group B receives priming with
      control vaccine (DryVax), followed by boosting with an appropriate placebo. At least 50
      percent of subjects in Part I will be observed for a minimum of 8 weeks before subsequent
      volunteers are enrolled in Part II. PER 11/18/94 AMENDMENT, Part I boosting is given on day
      392. PER 5/19/95 AMENDMENT, Part I boosting is given on day 756 if not available on day 392;
      if the appropriate product is not available then, the study will end on day 756. In Part II,
      vaccinia-naive volunteers are randomized to one of three regimens. Group C receives TBC-3B
      on day 0 and saline placebo on day 56. Group D receives TBC-3B on days 0 and 56. Both Group
      C and D receive boosting with TBC-3B or an alternative immunogen on day 224. Group E
      receives control vaccine (DryVax) on days 0 and 56, followed by appropriate placebo on day
      224. Per 06/10/94 addendum, volunteers will be contacted once or twice per year for at least
      5 years to check on health status.

      NOTE: Part I (Part A) of the protocol has closed to accrual.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Subjects must have:

          -  Negative ELISA and Western blot for HIV-1 within 6 weeks prior to immunization.

          -  Normal history and physical exam.

          -  History of smallpox vaccination at least 5 years prior to study entry (Part I) OR no
             prior smallpox vaccination (Part II).

          -  Absolute CD4 count >= 400 cells/mm3.

          -  Normal urinalysis.

        NOTE:

          -  No more than 10 percent of volunteers in both Parts I and II may be over 50 years of
             age.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Subjects with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Positive hepatitis B surface antigen.

          -  Medical or psychiatric condition (such as recent suicidal ideation or present
             psychosis) that precludes compliance.

          -  Occupational responsibilities that preclude compliance.

          -  Active syphilis. NOTE: Subjects with serology documented to be a false positive or
             due to a remote (> 6 months) treated infection are eligible.

          -  Active tuberculosis. NOTE: Subjects with a positive PPD and a normal chest x-ray
             showing no evidence of TB and not requiring isoniazid therapy are eligible.

          -  Eczema.

          -  Household contact with persons meeting any of the following criteria:

          -  pregnancy, less than 12 months of age, eczema, immunodeficiency disease, or use of
             immunosuppressive medications.

        Subjects with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of immunodeficiency, chronic illness, autoimmune disease, or use of
             immunosuppressive medications.

          -  History of anaphylaxis or other serious adverse reactions to vaccines.

          -  Eczema within the past year.

          -  History of serious allergic reaction to any substance, requiring hospitalization or
             emergent medical care (e.g., Steven-Johnson syndrome, bronchospasm, or hypotension).

          -  Prior psychiatric condition (such as history of suicide attempts or past psychosis)
             that precludes compliance.

          -  History of cancer unless there has been surgical excision that is considered to have
             achieved cure.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Prior HIV vaccines.

          -  Live attenuated vaccines within the past 60 days. NOTE: Medically indicated subunit
             or killed vaccines (e.g., influenza, pneumococcal) do not exclude but should be
             administered at least 2 weeks prior to HIV immunizations.

          -  Experimental agents within the past 30 days.

        Prior Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Receipt of blood products or immunoglobulins within the past 6 months. It is STRONGLY
             RECOMMENDED that any activity that might expose subject to HIV (unprotected sex or
             needle sharing) be avoided.
