TITLE:
      Acute Coronary Syndrome and Care-Seeking Delay: A Web Based Behavioral Study
SUMMARY:
      The primary aim of this study is to increase our understanding of care-seeking behavior
      surrounding heart attacks or acute coronary syndromes [ACS]. This study uses an internet
      based survey to ask individuals how they obtained medical care in the midst of a heart
      attack. At present, care-seeking delay among individuals stricken with a heart attack
      prevents them from obtaining the full therapeutic benefit of hospital based medical care in
      a timely manner to reduce the long term health consequences of a heart attack. By using a
      self-tailoring survey instrument the study attempts to take into consideration the complex
      social processes by which the individual and their family make decisions to seek medical
      care for symptoms of a heart attack. The study is designed to obtain a national sample of
      ACS care-seeking behavior in the United States.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The primary aim of this study is to increase our understanding of care-seeking behavior
      surrounding acute coronary syndromes [ACS] through the application and testing of an
      integrated self-regulatory care-seeking model [ISCM] and the utilization of a world wide web
      [WWW] based ISCM survey instrument. At present, care-seeking delay among individuals
      stricken with ACS [acute myocardial infarction [AMI], unstable angina or sudden cardiac
      death] prevents many patients from obtaining the full therapeutic benefit of hospital based
      thrombolytic and/or mechanical reperfusion therapy to reduce the morbid and mortal
      consequences of acute cardiovascular disease [CVD]. Results from prior studies of ACS
      care-seeking delay generally rely on measures of time duration from acute symptom onset
      [ASO] to hospital emergency department [ED] arrival and measures of social demographic and
      clinical variables, extracted from emergency medical system [EMS] logs and/or ED charts. By
      relying on such limited data sources, these studies have failed to take into consideration
      the complexity of the social and behavioral processes by which individuals make decisions to
      seek medical care for symptoms of ACS.

      By applying and testing an integrated self-regulatory care-seeking model [ISCM] to ACS
      care-seeking, it will be possible to delineate decision points and situations and
      circumstances that are critical to producing patterns of care-seeking that are efficient and
      expeditious or are protracted and delayed. The care-seeking process in the ISCM is viewed in
      terms of five analytic care-seeking phases from warning or premonitory symptoms to ED
      arrival. By noting the presence or absence of three central phases, it is possible to
      distinguish patterns of care-seeking and to record the duration of each care-seeking phase
      and total duration of each care-seeking path to the ED. The ISCM assumes that coping
      behaviors emerge over time and initially care-seeking behaviors are guided by demographic
      and structural factors. As the self-regulatory and coping processes emerge over the course
      of the ACS episode, the influence of these factors diminishes and emergent ACS evaluations,
      advice from others and health care providers, emerging symptoms and emotions, come to
      dominate the care-seeking process and directly determine the duration of ACS care-seeking.
      The study will test and explore the following hypotheses:

        1. Commonly used demographic variables, such as, age, sex, education and race will prove
           to be only one component, along with social situational and circumstantial, cognitive
           and emotional variables, that significantly influence the course and duration of ACS
           care-seeking.

        2. The ISCM will show that decision process variables associated with the care-seeking
           phases, the Self, Lay and Health Care Provider Phases, as shown in the Figure, are
           important predictors of time from symptoms onset to ED arrival and in the prediction of
           the length of time spent in each care-seeking phase.

        3. The ISCM will show differences in the total duration of the 5 most frequently occurring
           care-seeking paths to the ED and will explain most of the differences by the variables
           in Hypotheses 1 and 2.

        4. Conditional models of subjects who use key care-seeking phases, namely the Self, Lay
           and Health Care Provider Phases, will identify unique predictors of time in each phase.

        5. Significant interaction effects [model coefficient differences] will be found for
           important risk variables and socially important gender, age and racial groups. For
           example, African-Americans will show differences in model coefficients from
           Non-African-Americans.

      The proposed study utilizes a twice tested pilot ISCM survey instrument placed on two secure
      dedicated web servers to collect patient care-seeking data. The target sample size for this
      study is 2,314 patients who have experienced an ACS episode. Subjects will be recruited
      using: 1] extensive marketing of the study URL on websites of interest to cardiac patients
      and oriented toward cardiac health and ACS risks, such as, diabetes or hypertension; 2]
      placement of study information on discussion boards and chat rooms with a cardiac health
      focus; 3] emailing of a study flyer PDF for posting in public libraries, senior citizen
      centers, African-American churches, county and municipal health clinics, and HMO web sites;
      4] application of a viral marketing strategy; and 5] use of selected print media, for
      example, AARP publications. Marketing of the study site URL will emphasize the recruitment
      of women, the elderly and minorities. In the data collection phase of the study, the
      proportions of myocardial infarction and angina pectoris subjects falling into each cell of
      the cross classification of age, sex and race will be derived from NHANES 1999-2000 and
      2001-2002 studies. These estimates of the population proportions in these cells will be used
      to determine quotas for each of the cells in an attempt to ensure all risk groups are
      adequately represented. We will over sample African-Americans. Statistical models will be
      used to estimate the effects of variables that characterize the decision process on the time
      delay until ED arrival. Time required to move from one phase of the decision process to the
      next will also be modeled, as will the different paths chosen by the subjects. Models will
      also include patient characteristics and other circumstantial and situational variables in
      the decision process.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria: Acute myocardial infarction, acute coronary syndrome, unstable angina,
        men & women, all races & ethnicities

        Exclusion Criteria: age < 21 years
