TITLE:
      To Scan or Not to Scan: The Role of Follow-up CT Scanning for Management of Chronic Subdural Hematoma After Neurosurgical Evacuation
SUMMARY:
      Chronic subdural hematoma (CSH) is one of the most common bleedings of the head. These
      hematomas develop after minor head trauma and increase in size over weeks. Patients usually
      present with headaches, gait disturbances, language problems or confusion. The state of the
      art treatment of a symptomatic chronic subdural hematoma is to remove the hematoma by burr
      hole trepanation.

      The optimal follow-up for operated patients remains controversial. Due to the known high
      rate of a second hematoma at the same place (usually within weeks), one strategy is to
      perform serial computer tomography scans in order to identify recurrent hematomas early. The
      radiologic evidence of a second hematoma often leads to reoperation, even if the patient has
      no, or just slight symptoms. Another strategy after surgical hematoma evacuation is to
      closely follow the patient with neurological examinations and perform neuroimaging only in
      case of new symptoms. Advocators of this strategy argue that a follow-up with routine CT
      scans may be harmful due to additional and maybe unnecessary surgeries and hospital days in
      a patient population marked by advanced age and fragility.

      The aim of the current study is to evaluate the role of computer tomography scanning in the
      postoperative follow-up after removal of a chronic subdural hematoma. Participants of this
      study will be allocated by chance to one of two study groups: Patients allocated to group A
      will receive a computer tomography scan on day 2 and again on day 30 after surgery in
      addition to a clinical examination. Patients allocated to group B will be examined
      clinically on day 2 and day 30 without computer tomography. All patients will undergo a
      final clinical examination after 6 months. The study will recruit 400 patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background

      Chronic subdural hematoma (CSH) is one of the most common intracranial bleedings in patients
      over 60 years of age and a frequently found neurosurgical entity. Age related brain atrophy
      leads to enlargement of the subarachnoid space, a space limited by the dura mater and the
      arachnoid membrane. Blood vessels that occupy this space are being stretched and may rupture
      after a minor head trauma. Although the resulting bleeding itself is often without
      noticeable consequence for the patient, the anatomical outcome may be serious as it enlarges
      the subdural space. The formation of new leaky capillary-like vessels and/or volume
      enhancing osmotic gradients lead to the enlargement of the subdural hematoma over weeks,
      filling the intracranial space and compressing the brain. Headaches, gait disturbances,
      language problems, hemiparesis and decreased consciousness are among the many presenting
      symptoms and tend to develop over days or weeks.

      Computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head typically
      reveals the blood accumulation in the subdural space. Standard treatment includes the
      evacuation of the subdural blood through burr holes (see below) under either local or
      general anesthesia. In cases when a hematoma clot cannot be evacuated through burr holes a
      small craniotomy is performed. CSH is feared for its high recurrence rate (between 9 and
      27%) that mostly occurs within 3 months of the initial operation.

      The optimal follow-up course for operated patients remains controversial. Due to the high
      rate of recurrences, one strategy is to perform serial CT scans in order to identify
      recurrent hematomas early. The radiologic evidence of a recurrent or significant persistent
      hematoma often leads to reoperation. Another strategy after surgical hematoma evacuation is
      to closely follow the patient with neurological examinations and perform neuroimaging only
      in case of persistent or new neurologic deficits. Advocators of this strategy argue that
      follow up with routine CT scans may be harmful due to additional and maybe unnecessary
      surgeries and hospital days in a patient population marked by advanced age and fragility.

      However, even when neuroimaging is done routinely, no correlation has been observed between
      the radiologic evidence of a hematoma remnant and the reoperation rate. This observation has
      been reported by Mori and Maeda in a retrospective analysis of 500 patients. Some persistent
      hematoma is almost always seen after the surgical intervention and there seems to be a
      correlation between the re-expansion rate of the brain and the likelihood of hematoma
      recurrence. However, the correlation is weak and of little practical value for patient
      treatment. The high incidence of hematoma remnants in post-op imaging complicates the
      indication for re-operation of a recurrent CSH solely by imaging criteria. Since the
      presence and the amount of remnant hematoma after the operation is a poor predictor of
      future recurrent hematoma some clinicians refrain from postoperative CT scans and rely
      solely on neurological assessments. If patients become symptomatic, serial CT scans are
      performed and surgery is scheduled in cases of persistent, enlarging or new hematoma. The
      discrepancy in follow-up strategy reflects our current incomplete understanding of the
      pathophysiology of CSH and its recurrence.

      The aim of the current study is to evaluate the role of CT scanning in the postoperative
      treatment course after neurosurgical evacuation of CSH in a prospective, randomized
      controlled trial.

      Objective

      The hypothesis of interest to test in this trial is that a follow-up protocol without any CT
      scan is not inferior to a follow-up protocol with serial CT scans after neurosurgical
      evacuation of CSH as assessed with the modified Rankin scale at 6 months. Additional
      hypotheses of interest are that the size/volume/features of the hematoma rest/remnant in an
      early (<72 hours) CT scan after neurosurgical evacuation is not correlated to the
      neurological status of the patient and that the size/volume/features of the hematoma
      rest/remnant on post-op CT scans is not predictive for reoperation.

      Methods

      Patients will be screened and included into this study within 48 hours after surgery for a
      chronic subdural hematoma (burr hole trepanation and insertion of drainage). Study patients
      are randomized (1:1) on day 2 after surgery into CT-Scan arm (group A) or Clinical arm
      (group B). A CT scan is scheduled for patients of group A on day 2 and 30 after surgery.
      Patients of both study groups (A and B) will receive a neurological follow-up examination at
      day 2, 30 days and 6 months after surgery. Regardless of randomization all patients will
      receive CT scanning if judged necessary on clinical grounds at any time.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Newly diagnosed chronic subdural hematoma by CT scan or MRI, operated within the last
             48 hours

          -  Age 18 years or older

          -  Written informed consent from the patient to participate in the study

        Exclusion Criteria

          -  Moribund state of health prohibiting surgery

          -  Foreseeable difficulties in follow-up due to geographic reasons (e.g. patients living
             abroad)

          -  Recurrent hematoma if the first surgery was performed before study start

          -  CSH due to spontaneous spinal CSF fistula or meningeosis carcinomatosa

          -  Pregnancy

          -  Patient with Metastatic Disease
