TITLE:
      Sertraline and Cognitive Therapy in Depressed Alcoholics
SUMMARY:
      This study will assess whether individuals treated with sertraline (Zoloft) and cognitive
      behavior therapy will experience improvement with their depression and consume less alcohol
      than individuals treated with a placebo and cognitive behavior therapy. This is a 12-week,
      random assignment, placebo-controlled, double-blind study with followup assessments 1 and 3
      months after treatment.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for major depressive episode.

          -  Meets criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence thirty days prior to entering the
             study.

          -  Has had no more than one previous inpatient medical detoxification.

          -  Able to maintain sobriety for ten days.

          -  Able to read and understand questionnaires and informed consent.

          -  Lives within 50 miles of the study site, has a stable living situation, and a
             reliable source of collateral reporting.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for any other psychoactive substance dependence other than nicotine.

          -  Any psychoactive substance abuse (other than nicotine or marijuana) within 30 days
             before beginning of study.

          -  Meets criteria for other psychiatric disorders including: panic disorder,
             obsessive-compulsive disorder, bipolar affective disorder, cyclothymia,
             schizophrenia, any organic mental disorder, eating disorder, dissociative disorder,
             or post-traumatic stress disorder.

          -  Has evidence of treatment resistant depression defined as more than one previous
             treatment episode for depression, which can include hospitalization and/or one course
             of antidepressant medication.

          -  Patients may not have been prescribed a specific serotonergic medication within the
             month prior to study and may not have taken any antidepressant or antipsychotic
             within the two weeks prior to study.

          -  Current use of disulfiram (Antabuse) or anti-seizure medications.

          -  Clinically significant medical problems: cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, or
             endocrine problems that would limit participation or limit medication ingestion.

          -  Hepatocellular disease.

          -  Females who are pregnant, nursing, or not using a reliable form of birth control.

          -  Current charges pending for violent crime (excluding DUI related offenses).

          -  Previous adverse experience with a serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

          -  Current homicidal or suicidal ideation.
