TITLE:
      Impact of the BB Box System on Postpartum Maternal Anxiety, Post Traumatic Stress and Mother-child Relationships
SUMMARY:
      The main objective of this study is to compare the degree of maternal anxiety at Day 3
      postpartum in mothers who did or did not have access to a video communication system (BB-Box
      system) from the time of initial separation with their baby.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The secondary objectives of the study are to compare the following between the two arms of
      the study:

      A. The degree of postpartum maternal anxiety at day 1, day 7 and at hospital discharge.
      Anxiety will be compared point by point but also via kinetics.

      B. The incidence maternal post traumatic stress disorder at 6 and 12 months.

      C. The incidence of mother-child relationship disorders at 6 and 12 months.

      D. Infant vital signs during the hospital stay.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  The patient must have given his/her informed and signed consent

          -  The patient must be insured or beneficiary of a health insurance plan

          -  The patient is available for 12 months of follow up

          -  The patient has given birth this day to a premature child (< 36 weeks of gestation
             and/or < 2 kg birthweight)

          -  Separation of child and mother since birth

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  The patient or baby is participating in another study, excepting the studies "OASIS"
             or "PROM8736"

          -  The patient or baby is in an exclusion period determined by a previous study

          -  The patient is under judicial protection, under tutorship or curatorship

          -  The patient or father refuses to sign the consent

          -  It is impossible to correctly inform the patient

          -  Preexisting maternal psychiatric pathology

          -  Major or lethal poly-malformation syndrome

          -  Severe pathologies that threaten child survival: pulmonary hypertension, septic
             shock, anoxic-ischemic brain

          -  Any emergency situation preventing patient involvement

          -  Mother and/or child not hospitalized at the Nîmes University Hospital

          -  Death of the patient or child during the study
