TITLE:
      Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Trial (SCD-HeFT)
SUMMARY:
      To compare conventional treatment of congestive heart failure (CHF) with two experimental
      interventions: amiodarone and an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Congestive heart failure is a major cause of mortality and morbidity, and sudden arrhythmic
      death is the cause of death in from 30 to 50 percent of those who die. The study addresses
      the problem and tests two interventions that have promise of benefit. To date, many of the
      therapies that have been tested for congestive heart failure have either been ineffective or
      actually decreased survival. Conventional therapy is still relatively ineffective in that
      recent studies such as the Congestive Heart Failure - Survival Trial of Antiarrhythmic
      Therapy (CHF-STAT) have demonstrated a mortality of 40 percent during two-and-half years of
      follow-up. The implantable cardioverter-defibrillator appears to be effective in patients
      who are resuscitated from cardiac arrest, but until recently, the devices required a
      thoracotomy and had to be reserved for patients with the highest risk for sudden death. The
      newer transvenous devices with pectoral patches can now be considered for broader
      applications. Although there have been mixed results with amiodarone in patients with
      congestive heart failure, there is a general consensus that it could be effective in the
      proper subset of patients with congestive heart failure. A comparison of the optimal device
      and drug is appropriate for such a high risk population.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Three-armed, randomized, multicenter trial conducted at over 125 North American, Australian
      and New Zealand sites. Patients were enrolled over 2.5 years after being randomly assigned
      to amiodarone, matched placebo or an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD). Median
      follow-up was 45.5 months. All three arms used conventional therapy for heart failure and
      coronary artery disease (ACE inhibitors, lipid lowering and beta-blockers). The central
      hypothesis was that amiodarone or the ICD would improve survival compared to placebo. The
      primary outcome was the prevention of all-cause mortality. Secondary outcome measures
      included cardiac mortality and arrhythmic mortality, morbidity, quality of life, and
      incremental cost-effectiveness of the interventions. .
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients with New York Heart Association class II or class III heart failure and ejection
        fraction less than or equal to 35%.
