TITLE:
      Comparison of a Tissue Perfusion Guided Hemodynamic Protocol With a Standard Hemodynamic Protocol in Septic Shock Patients
SUMMARY:
      The Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) published 2008 revised guidelines to improve survival of
      septic shock patients. For hemodynamic stabilization the SSC recommends distinct treatment
      goals. The study hypothesis is that a tissue perfusion guided protocol could reduce the
      duration on vasopressor treatment compared to a conventional protocol.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background

      Septic shock is a frequent and severe entity with a mortality of 55%. The Surviving Sepsis
      Campaign (SSC) published 2008 revised guidelines to improve survival of septic shock
      patients.

      For hemodynamic stabilization the SSC recommends as treatment goals a mean arterial blood
      pressure > 65mmHg (MAP), a central venous blood pressure of 8-12 mmHg, a mixed venous oxygen
      saturation >65%, a central venous oxygen saturation > 70% and a diuresis > 0.5 ml/kg/h (1).
      According to the SSC guidelines a MAP > 65 mmHg should be aimed because at this blood
      pressure level tissue perfusion is preserved. This is based on a study in ten septic shock
      patients where norepinephrine was titrated to three levels (65, 75 and 85 mmHg) and the
      authors concluded that parameters of tissue perfusion did not differ between the each level
      (2).

      Objective

      To evaluate if a hemodynamic protocol guided by parameters of tissue perfusion could reduce
      the duration of vasopressor treatment in septic shock patients.

      Methods

      Patients suffering from septic shock requiring vasopressor support are randomly assigned to
      a control group (usual care) and an intervention group (tissue perfusion guided protocol).
      In the intervention group parameters of tissue perfusion are used to guide hemodynamic
      therapy.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  2 or more SIRS criteria according to ACCP/SCCM definition

          -  Documented infection or strong suspicion of infection with adequate antibiotic
             treatment

          -  Shock according to ACCP/SCCM definition with the necessity of vasopressor treatment

        Exclusion Criteria

          -  Patients admitted with central nervous diseases

          -  ST elevation myocardial infarction

          -  Pulmonary embolism

          -  Out of hospital cardiac arrest patients

          -  Patients with therapy limitations

          -  Known pregnancy

          -  Inclusion in other interventional trials
