TITLE:
      Long-Term Lithium Treatment for Aggressive Conduct Disorder
SUMMARY:
      This study will examine the long-term effects of lithium used to treat children and
      adolescents with aggressive conduct disorder (severe aggression).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Psychotherapeutic agents are often administered without sufficient testing to children and
      adolescents, often on a long-term basis, to reduce aggression. Many pressures, including
      managed care, will increase the utilization of pharmacotherapy in the outpatient setting to
      treat serious problems. Lithium is the most promising agent for the treatment of aggression
      in children and adolescents. However, it has not been shown that lithium is an effective
      treatment for these patients in the outpatient (non-hospital) setting, or on a long-term
      basis. The purpose of this study is to examine the long-term effects of lithium used to
      treat children and adolescents with aggressive conduct disorder (severe aggression).

      The proposed study is a two-phased clinical trial of lithium for the treatment of aggression
      in conduct disorder. Both phases are double-blind and placebo-controlled with randomization
      and employ a parallel groups design. Phase 1 contains a short-term 8-week controlled trial,
      with twice as many subjects randomized to lithium as placebo, increasing the pool of
      potential lithium responders to continue to Phase 2. In Phase 2, lithium responders from
      Phase 1 enter a 6-month long-term controlled trial. Every attempt is made to define
      responders to lithium.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Males and females

          2. Ages between 9 and 17 years.

          3. Conduct disorder according to DSM-IV (As rated on the DICA-IV).

          4. The aggression criterion at screening

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Mental Retardation.

          2. Pervasive Developmental Disorder(s).

          3. Major Depressive Disorder or Dysthymic Disorder.

          4. Bipolar Disorder.

          5. Psychotic Disorder (including Schizophreniform Disorder and Schizophrenia).

          6. Major medical problem such as cardiac, renal, and thyroid diseases, or seizure
             disorder.

          7. History of psychoactive medication in the previous 2 weeks.

          8. Current Pregnancy in females.

          9. History of Substance Dependence in the past month.

         10. Prior to the proposed study, a history of lithium treatment with serum lithium levels
             of 0.4 mEq/L or higher for a cumulative period of greater than 10 days.
