TITLE:
      Interruption of Maternal-to-Infant Transmission of Hepatitis B by Means of Hepatitis B Immune Globulin
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate whether hepatitis B immune globulin with a high level of antibody against the
      hepatitis B antigen would be capable of interrupting maternal-fetal transmission of
      hepatitis B virus, the single most important route of hepatitis spread in the entire Third
      World.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      A baseline study on the vertical transmission of hepatitis B virus in Taiwan revealed that
      15 percent of all pregnant women were persistent carriers of hepatitis B antigen and that 40
      percent of their new babies developed a protracted antigenemia during the first 6 months of
      life. The incidence of acute hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatoma was high in Taiwan, and
      patients with these disorders had a fivefold to sixfold higher prevalence of hepatitis B
      antigen than healthy persons. Given the important public health problems of this disease in
      Taiwan and the rest of the Third World, this trial sought to answer the important question
      of whether hepatitis B immune globulin with a high level of antibody against the antigen
      would be of utility in combating the problem.

      Two hundred and five babies were accepted into the study, which was actually conducted on
      Taiwan through a contract to the Community Blood Council of Greater New York. Only those
      babies born of mothers who had HBsAg complement fixation titers of 1:8 or greater were
      included in these studies. At birth, blood was obtained from the mothers and cord blood from
      the infants. Follow-up bloods were obtained from both the mother and baby when the infants
      were 1, 3, 6, 12, 24 and 36 months of age. In addition, all household family contacts were
      bled at least once during this period.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, fixed sample. A total of 205 neonates were assigned to treatment
      with high-titer hepatitis B immune globulin, standard immune globulin, or albumin placebo
      within 72 hours of delivery.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Boy and girl infants, birth to 3 years, born to mothers who were hepatitis B surface
        antigen carriers.
