TITLE:
      Evaluating a Small Change Approach to Preventing Long Term Weight Gain in Overweight and Obese Adults
SUMMARY:
      Obesity is a major risk factor for disease and a public health problem. Recent information
      suggests that while it is possible for most overweight adults to lose a substantial amount
      of weight, maintaining the weight loss for any extended time (2 to 3 years) is very
      difficult. This is because trying to maintain big changes in exercise and/or eating
      behaviour is very difficult in today's environment that makes sustain big changes in
      behaviour (Example: eat allot less or exercise allot more) very hard. In fact at this time
      health professionals are unsure of how best to help overweight adults maintain big
      behavioral changes for long periods of time. In response, we propose that making smaller
      changes in eating and exercise habits every day may be possible in today's environment and
      if so, small weight changes may be possible to maintain for long periods of time. This study
      is designed to assess whether making small changes in eating and exercise behavior will be
      associated with sustained weight loss over three (3) years. The results of the study may
      have important implications for development of public health messages and clinical
      guidelines for prevention and treatment of obesity through small changes in both exercise
      and eating habits.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The prevalence of obesity and associated morbidity among Canadian adults is already high and
      increasing. Prevalence estimates for overweight determined from measured height and weight
      now exceeds 62 % in Canadian adults1; approximately 15.5 million Canadian adults are now
      overweight and obese1. Obesity is associated with a wide range of health outcomes from
      co-morbidities including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease and certain cancers, to
      psychiatric disorders such as depression1. Direct costs attributed to obesity in Canada
      range from 4.6 to 7.1 billion dollars annually1. Despite agreement concerning the urgent
      need to address the obesity problem; few strategies have been successful on a wide scale
      basis. Past efforts to achieve and sustain weight loss have not been particularly
      successful. We3 and others4 have repeatedly demonstrated in randomized controlled trials
      that most adults are not able to sustain the major changes in behaviour that are required to
      maintain weight loss long term. Thus, although it is an admirable goal to substantially
      reduce the number of overweight or obese Canadians, this goal may be totally out of reach in
      the short term. The question then is what can be done to address the obesity problem now? We
      propose that a reasonable start point in addressing the obesity problem is to develop
      behavioural goals for prevention of weight gain. This strategy can at least keep the problem
      from getting worse and at best, can reduce obesity rates over time.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Men and women between 25 and 65 years of age.

          -  Overweight or Class I or Class II BMI.

          -  Walk without assistance.

          -  Commit to a schedule of assessment visits

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Physical impairment which would make the intervention very difficult, or unsafe
             according to the patient's physician including history of myocardial infarction,
             stroke, coronary bypass surgery or angioplasty in the last 6 months; peripheral
             artery disease, unstable angina or ischemia.

          -  Enrolled within past year in a formal weight loss program

          -  Reported losing greater than 5% of current body weight in the previous 6 months,

          -  Smoking

          -  Plans to move from the area,

          -  Participating in another research study.

          -  Clinically judged to be unsuitable for participation or adherence as determined by
             the participants physician

          -  Inability or unwillingness to provide informed consent.
