TITLE:
      Dietary Intervention Study in Children (DISC)
SUMMARY:
      To assess the feasibility, acceptability, efficacy, and safety of dietary intervention in
      free-living children ages 8-10 with elevated low density lipoprotein cholesterol levels.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Several lines of evidence provided the rationale for intervening in children. A large body
      of autopsy and pathologic evidence had accumulated showing that atherosclerosis, including
      fatty streaks, increased surface involvement, and advanced microscopic lesions, began in
      childhood. Blood cholesterol levels tracked from childhood to adulthood, with tracking
      correlations ranging from .6 to .8. Therefore, a high proportion of children with high
      levels of cholesterol have high levels as adults. Family clustering of risk factors had also
      been reported. Studies showed 2-3 times increased prevalence of coronary heart disease in
      adult relatives of children with high cholesterol compared to children with normal
      cholesterol, and 2.2 times increased prevalence in high cholesterol in children who had a
      parent or grandparent with premature coronary heart disease compared with children who did
      not have a family history of premature heart disease. Finally, there was high likelihood
      that environmental influences on coronary heart disease risk factors had their behavioral
      antecents in childhood. Thus, dietary habits which contributed toward elevated blood
      cholesterol levels were likely to have developed early in life, and it was hoped that
      behavioral change achieved during childhood was likely to persist into adulthood.

      Although numerous studies had shown that dietary modification could lower blood cholesterol
      levels in adults, only a few studies had shown this effect in children, and none were
      long-term. Furthermore, the impact on long-term growth and development in children had not
      been studied. Concerns were raised about the safety of cholesterol-lowering diets in
      children, particularly during peak growing years. These concerns included possible deficits
      in growth and nutrient adequacy, and potential adverse psychological effects. This paucity
      of data was a potential barrier to active prevention measures. To fill this gap in
      knowledge, the DISC trial, a randomized, controlled clinical trial, tested the efficacy and
      safety of long-term dietary intervention for reduction of serum LDL-C levels in children
      during puberty.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      In the feasibility study, children of both sexes, ages 8 to 10 at baseline starting in 1987,
      were randomized to either a control group or to a usual care group for whom more intensive
      dietary intervention for the child and the family was directed. The feasibility study lasted
      16 months. The full-scale trial began in December 1988 with the randomization of a total of
      663 children. At baseline, mean LDL-C levels, nutrient intakes, anthropometric measurements,
      nutritional biochemical levels, and psychosocial measures were similar in the two groups.
      The intervention group was assigned to a series of group and individual sessions to teach
      the children and their families to follow a diet containing 28 percent of calories as total
      fat, dietary cholesterol intake less than 75 mg/1000 kcal, and up to 9% of calories from
      polyunsaturated fat. The diets were designed to meet nutritional requirements of growing
      children. The usual care group was provided a packet of general dietary information only.
      The primary efficacy outcome was a difference in changes in LDL-C levels between the two
      groups at 36 months. Primary safety endpoints were change in height and serum ferritin
      levels. Secondary safety outcomes included serum zinc, retinol, albumin levels, red blood
      cell folate, ratio of LDL-C to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, sexual maturation,
      cognitive development, and psychosocial assessments. Recruitment was completed in July 1990.
      Intervention and follow-up was extended until 1997 when the participants were on average 17
      years old. Data analysis continued through January 1999.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Children, ages 8 to 10, with elevated LDL-C levels.
