TITLE:
      A Phase I/II Study of Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity (DTH) Reactions to Intradermal HIV Envelope Antigen
SUMMARY:
      To determine the frequency of delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reactions in HIV-positive
      patients to two doses of two envelope glycoprotein antigens prepared differently. To
      determine whether patients who have previously demonstrated a DTH response to intradermal
      MGStage HIV-1 gp160 IIIB baculovirus (MicroGeneSys) have a reproducible response to a repeat
      injection of gp160 and whether there is cross-reactivity to intradermal HIV-1 rgp160 IIIB
      vero cell expressed (Immuno-AG).

      PER 4/5/95 AMENDMENT: To also determine whether patients who respond to HIV-1 rgp160 IIIB
      baculovirus (MicroGeneSys) have cross-reactivity to intradermal skin tests of HIV-1 rgp160
      MN (Immuno-AG).

      Previous studies in individuals immunized with gp160 suggest that a skin test response in
      immunized patients can be used as a surrogate marker for new proliferative and cytotoxic
      responses induced by vaccination.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Previous studies in individuals immunized with gp160 suggest that a skin test response in
      immunized patients can be used as a surrogate marker for new proliferative and cytotoxic
      responses induced by vaccination.

      Patients are stratified into three groups. Fifteen patients previously immunized with
      MicroGeneSys rgp160 antigen in ACTG 137 and not on antiretroviral therapy will receive
      intradermal injections of Immuno-AG rgp160 IIIB (vero cell expressed) in one arm, followed 1
      week later by intradermal injections of MicroGeneSys rgp160 IIIB (baculovirus expressed) in
      the opposite arm (stratum 1). Forty patients who are not previously immunized with rgp160
      will receive intradermal injections of Immuno-AG gp160 IIIB in one arm simultaneously with
      MicroGeneSys gp160 IIIB in the opposite arm; these patients are either not on antiretroviral
      therapy (stratum 2) or currently on antiretroviral therapy (stratum 3). All patients return
      48 hours after each injection for skin test reading.

      PER 4/5/95 AMENDMENT: Patients on all strata will re-enroll to receive Immuno-AG rgp160 MN
      in one arm simultaneously with MicroGeneSys rgp160 IIIB in the opposite arm.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed in Step 2 (PER 4/5/95 AMENDMENT):

          -  Approved antiretroviral drugs.

        Patients must have:

          -  Documented HIV infection.

          -  CD4 count >= 400 cells/mm3.

          -  NO current active opportunistic infection or neoplasm (other than stable cutaneous
             Kaposi's sarcoma).

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Known hypersensitivity to insect proteins.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Antihistamine or anti-inflammatory medications for the 48-hour period between
             injection and skin test reading.

          -  Topical steroids.

        Prior Medication:

        PER 4/5/95 AMENDMENT -

        Excluded:

          -  Prior immunization with experimental HIV vaccines (strata 2 and 3 only).

          -  Systemic corticosteroids, topical corticosteroids on the arms, or other systemic
             immunosuppressant agents or antineoplastic agents within 30 days prior to study
             entry.

          -  Antihistamine or anti-inflammatory medications within 72 hours prior to intradermal
             injections.

        PREVIOUS VERSION -

        Excluded within 30 days prior to study entry:

          -  Any antiretroviral drugs (other than AZT, ddI, ddC, or d4T for patients in stratum
             3).

          -  Systemic corticosteroids, topical corticosteroids on the arms, or other systemic
             immunosuppressant agents or antineoplastic agents.

        Excluded within 72 hours prior to intradermal injections:

          -  Antihistamine or anti-inflammatory medications.
