TITLE:
      A "Pre-Enrollment" Protocol for HIV-Infected Adolescents
SUMMARY:
      PRIMARY: To identify, characterize, and co-enroll HIV-infected adolescents into existing and
      future ACTG (or other NIH-sponsored) HIV treatment protocols through the systematic and
      recurrent assessment of eligibility. To assess the ability of adolescents enrolled in ACTG
      220 to adhere to ACTG (or other NIH-sponsored) HIV treatment protocols; and to define
      factors that influence the adolescent's ability to enter or adhere to study protocols.

      SECONDARY: To describe the nature, stage, and progression of HIV infection in adolescents.

      Little is known about HIV-infected adolescents as a group and, as a result, small numbers of
      them are currently enrolled in ACTG drug studies. Creative approaches are needed to
      encourage enrollment of HIV-infected adolescents whose socio-demographic profile has made
      access to NIH-sponsored research unlikely.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Little is known about HIV-infected adolescents as a group and, as a result, small numbers of
      them are currently enrolled in ACTG drug studies. Creative approaches are needed to
      encourage enrollment of HIV-infected adolescents whose socio-demographic profile has made
      access to NIH-sponsored research unlikely.

      At entry and at every subsequent visit, participants are systematically evaluated for
      eligibility and willingness to enter ACTG (or other NIH-sponsored) HIV treatment protocols
      from a menu developed and updated by the Pediatric Adolescent Working Group of the ACTG. A
      survey of participant attitudes, behaviors, and beliefs is administered and updated
      semiannually. Participants attend clinic visits every 3 months and are followed for a
      minimum of 6 months, until the end of the study. They receive periodic physical exams, STD
      and gynecologic or genitourinary evaluations, HIV symptom assessment and related diagnoses,
      TB evaluation, and laboratory tests (hematology and immunology).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Participants must meet the following criteria:

          -  HIV infection.

          -  NOT currently enrolled in an ACTG treatment protocol.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Participants with the following condition are excluded:

          -  No legal provision for consent to participate in clinical research can be determined.
