TITLE:
      Behavioral/Drug Therapy for Alcohol-Nicotine Dependence (Naltrexone/Nicotine Patch)
SUMMARY:
      This study will develop a behavioral and drug relapse prevention program for individuals who
      are dependent on both alcohol and tobacco. The study's goal is to show that individuals
      receiving nicotine replacement therapy and naltrexone (Revia) with behavior therapy will
      have higher rates of abstinence from both smoking and drinking than individuals who do not
      receive the drug therapies. Individuals will be placed in a 12-week outpatient treatment
      program with followup assessments 1, 3, and 6 months after treatment.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for alcohol and nicotine dependence.

          -  Individuals will be outpatients with alcohol and nicotine dependence who have
             completed detoxification (medicated or nonmedicated) within the past 48-120 hours.

          -  Smoking no less than 10 cigarettes/day and no greater than 50 cigarettes/day.

          -  Motivated to quit smoking.

          -  Willing and able to participate in the 12 week outpatient treatment.

          -  Acceptable health.

          -  Able to provide a collateral informant.

          -  Willing to be followed for 6 months after treatment ends.

          -  Willing and able to provide the names of three family members or friends to aid in
             locating participants for follow-up.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Current diagnosis of dependence on other substances except nicotine and alcohol.

          -  Having moderately severe or severe alcohol withdrawal symptoms.

          -  Recent (less than 48 hours) evidence of hazardous drinking (more than 2 drinks/day
             for females; 3 drinks/day for males).

          -  History of opioid abuse.

          -  Recent use of cocaine.

          -  Not desiring to quit smoking.

          -  Recent past or current pharmacotherapy involving naltrexone or transdermal nicotine
             systems.

          -  History of psychosis.

          -  Current suicidality, homicidally or psychiatric symptoms requiring other medications.

          -  Presence of medical abnormalities that contraindicate naltrexone or nicotine
             replacement therapy.

          -  Current treatment with psychotropic medications.

          -  Pregnancy or nursing for female patients. Inability or unwillingness to participate
             in the 12-week outpatient treatment.
