TITLE:
      Carbetocin at Elective Cesarean Delivery Part 4
SUMMARY:
      PostPartum hemorrhage (PPH) is a major cause of maternal death worldwide. Oxytocin is the
      most commonly used uterotonic drug to prevent and treat PPH in North America. However
      oxytocin has a very short duration of action, requiring a continuous infusion to achieve
      sustained uterotonic activity. Moreover large doses are associated with adverse effects like
      hypotension, nausea, vomiting, dysrhythmias and ST changes. The Society of Obstetricians and
      Gynecologists of Canada (SOGC) has recommended a single dose of 100 mcg of carbetocin at
      elective cesarean delivery to promote uterine contraction. In three studies recently
      performed at Mount Sinai Hospital, the investigators have found no difference in uterine
      contractility between the doses of 20- 120 mcg carbetocin and that the ED90 is 14.8 mcg.
      Thus a larger trial comparing the minimum effective dose determined in the previous three
      trials with the standard 100 mcg dose is necessary to confirm these findings.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The current oxytocin regimen requires the administration of a continuous infusion to achieve
      sustained uterotonic activity, which can be associated with a number of side effects and
      unpredictable efficacy. Carbetocin in a single 100 mcg dose has apparently greater efficacy,
      with a similar side effect profile to that of oxytocin. In addition, some studies have also
      shown that there is less blood loss and less requirement for additional uterotonic drugs
      when carbetocin is administered. Studies conducted by the investigators group at Mount Sinai
      have shown similar efficacy between the doses ranging from 20 to 100 mcg of carbetocin. In
      the investigators study, the investigators are going to compare those two doses of
      carbetocin to determine that 20 mcg is not inferior to 100 mcg to produce adequate uterine
      tone in elective cesarean delivery. This study will be a randomized, double - blind, non
      inferiority study.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Elective cesarean delivery under spinal anesthesia.

          -  Written informed consent to participate in this study.

          -  Term pregnancy

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Refusal to give written informed consent.

          -  Allergy or hypersensitivity to carbetocin or oxytocin.

          -  Conditions that predispose to uterine atony and postpartum hemorrhage, such as
             placenta previa, multiple gestation, preeclampsia, eclampsia, macrosomia,
             polyhydramnios, uterine fibroids, previous history of uterine atony and postpartum
             bleeding, or bleeding diathesis.

          -  Hepatic, renal, and vascular disease.
