TITLE:
      41.8 Degree Centigrade Whole Body Hyperthermia for the Treatment of Rheumatoid Diseases
SUMMARY:
      Recently a non-toxic system for whole body hyperthermia (WBH) used at the University of
      Wisconsin has been shown to induce soluble tumor necrosis factor-receptor (sTNF-R) I and II
      when patients are heated systemically to 41.8C for 60 minutes. This observation might
      provide a biological basis for the therapeutic application of WBH to rheumatoid diseases,
      for which there is a positive anecdotal clinical experience. Inherent in the hypothesis
      which is the basis for this protocol is the concept that the induction of TNF receptors by
      WBH may induce a remission in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Beyond clinical
      response the biological endpoint for this investigation includes cytokine levels, TNF
      levels, sTNF-R levels and changes in cellular TNF receptors.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients are required to meet the criteria of the American College of Rheumatology
             (ACR)for rheumatoid arthritis.

          -  Patients should be in functional class II, or III according to the criteria of the
             ACR.

          -  All candidates must be unsuccessfully treated (lack of efficacy) with at least two of
             the following disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: hydroxychloroquinine, oral or
             injectable gold, methotrexate, azathioprine, penicillamine, and sulfasalazine.

          -  Patients receiving nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids (<=
             10 mg per day), or both are eligible if the dosage has been stable for at least four
             weeks before treatment and remained so throughout the study and follow-up period (the
             use of narcotics for pain flares is allowed).

          -  The necessary degree of disease activity at enrollment should be confirmed by a
             finding of 10 or more swollen joints, 12 or more tender joints, and one of the
             following two criteria: a Westergren erythrocyte sedimentation rate of at least 28 mm
             per hour or a serum C-reactive protein level of more than 2.0 mg per deciliter; or
             morning stiffness for at least 60 minutes.

          -  Patients must have adequate bone marrow function, adequate liver function, adequate
             renal function, calcium and electrolytes.

          -  Patients must have a dobutamine stress ECHO, or exercise cardiac MUGA, or exercise
             ECHO scan prior to entry and must fulfill certain criteria to be eligible. The spirit
             of the criteria are to rule out organic heart disease.

          -  Respiratory status: Patients who have FEV1 of >= 60% of predicted, as well as a
             maximum voluntary volume (MVV) of >= 60% of predicted, and blood gases with a PO2 of
             >= 60 or oxygen saturation of >= 90% are eligible.
