TITLE:
      Carbetocin at Elective Cesarean Delivery Part 2
SUMMARY:
      Post-partum hemorrhage (PPH) is a major cause of maternal death worldwide. Oxytocin is the
      most common uterotonic drug used to prevent and treat PPH in North America, however, there
      are some limitations to its use. Oxytocin has a very short duration of action, which
      requires a continuous infusion to achieve sustained uterotonic activity. The Society of
      Obstetricians and Gynecologists of Canada (SOGC) has recently recommended a single 100mcg
      dose of carbetocin at elective Cesarean delivery to promote uterine contraction and prevent
      post partum hemorrhage (PPH), in lieu of the more traditional oxytocin regimens. Carbetocin
      lasts 4 to 7 times longer than oxytocin, with a similar side effect profile and apparent
      greater efficacy rate. However, a dose response to determine the minimum effective dose of
      carbetocin has not yet been published. The investigators hypothesize that the minimum
      effective dose (ED90) is above 20mcgs and below 80mcgs in women undergoing elective Cesarean
      delivery.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The Society of Obstetricians and Gynecologists of Canada (SOGC) recently recommended a
      100mcg intravenous bolus dose of carbetocin following Cesarean delivery.

      Studies thus far show that carbetocin may be just as effective as oxytocin in promoting
      uterine contraction, with a similar side effect profile. In addition, patients receiving
      carbetocin may experience less blood loss, and require less additional uterotonics when
      compared with oxytocin. A dose response study conducted by Cordovani et al suggested no
      difference in efficacy of uterine contraction for doses of carbetocin between 80-120mcg.
      Additionally, hypotension was noted for all dose groups studied.

      The results of this follow-up study will define the minimum required dose of carbetocin for
      uterine contraction, thus minimizing unnecessary side effects, improving quality and safety
      of patient care. It may also contribute in establishing carbetocin as a substitute to
      oxytocin for elective cesarean section at our institution as well as others.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All patients planned for elective cesarean delivery under spinal anesthesia.

          -  All patients who give written informed consent to participate in this study.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  All patients who refuse to give written informed consent.

          -  All patients who claim allergy or hypersensitivity to carbetocin or oxytocin.

          -  All patients with conditions that predispose to uterine atony and postpartum
             hemorrhage such as placenta previa, multiple gestation, preeclampsia, eclampsia,
             macrosomia, polyhydramnios, uterine fibroids, previous history of uterine atony and
             postpartum bleeding, or bleeding diathesis.

          -  All patients with hepatic, renal, and vascular disease,

          -  All patients requiring general anesthesia prior to the administration of the study
             drug.
