TITLE:
      Intravenous Isosorbide Dinitrate Versus Sublingual Isosorbide Dinitrate for the Relief of Acute Anginal Episodes in Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) Patients
SUMMARY:
      This is a randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study, clinical trail designed to
      evaluate the efficacy safety and superiority of intravenous boluses of isosorbide dinitrate
      for the relief of acute anginal pain episodes in acute coronary syndrome patients in
      comparison with the usual manner of S/L isosorbide dinitrate .
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Analgesia is an important element in the management of ACS patients. Pain contributes to the
      heightened sympathetic activity that is particularly prominent during periods of acute
      STEMI, NSTEMI and unstable angina and consequentially causes elevation of tissue oxygen
      demand. Control of cardiac pain is typically accomplished with a combination of oxygen,
      analgesic (e.g. morphine) beta blockers agents and primarily nitrates.

      Sublingual nitrates are currently the guidelines recommended preparation for instant relief
      of brief episodes of pain. In patients with prolonged periods of waxing and waning chest
      pain, drip of intravenous nitrates may be of benefit in controlling of symptoms and
      correcting ischemia.

      Intravenous nitrates are also indicated for the treatment of acute decompensated CHF
      patients with pulmonary edema, nevertheless the current treatment for these patients edema
      is repeated intravenous boluses of and not sublingual isosorbide dinitrate, followed by
      continuous drip. Although there is no hard data on intravenous high-dose nitrates for the
      relief of acute anginal pain episodes, our clinical impression with this method is
      excellent.

      Intravenous boluses of isosorbide dinitrate in a hospital setting provides immediate,
      accurate (bioavailability ) and is an easily controlled modality for providing nitrates.

      Since intravenous boluses of isosorbide dinitrate is the standard care for acute anginal
      pain episodes in our ICCU at this time, a well designed comparative study for the two
      methods would help it to become a guideline and not a matter of choice in these cases.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Age > 18 years or older.

          2. Admission to the ICCU with ACS (non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome or 24 hours
             after ST elevation myocardial infarction) .

          3. Presence of ischemic symptoms (≥5 minutes) during hospitalization.

          4. Pain assessment of 3 out of 10 on Visual Analog Scale (VAS) 1 or dynamic ECG findings
             (ST segment deviation ≥0.05 mV or T wave inversion ≥ 0.3 mV)

          5. Willing and able to provide written informed consent according to the regulations of
             the Ministry of Health and the Helsinki committee instructions.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Patient who meet any of the following criteria are excluded from the study:

          2. Persistent ST-segment elevation ≥ 1 mV in 2 or more contiguous leads or new LBBB.

          3. Acute pulmonary edema

          4. Sepsis

          5. Sustained systolic blood pressure < 90 mm Hg or evidence of cardiogenic shock

          6. Pregnant women

          7. Use at randomization of agents known to enhance the efficacy of nitrates.

          8. Clinically significant aortic stenosis

          9. Cr > 2 mg/dL

         10. Participation in another trial of an investigational drug or device on randomization.

         11. Allergy or sensitivity to nitatrate compounds

         12. Acute episode of cerebrovascular attack

         13. Inability to comply with the protocol and follow-up
