TITLE:
      Viral Activation Transfusion Study (VATS)
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of the trial was to determine if transfusion of allogeneic blood to HIV-1
      infected persons led to immune activation and consequent induction of HIV-1 or /or
      Cytomegalovirus (CMV) replication, and whether this adversely affected clinical prognosis.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The initiative was approved by the NHLBI AIDS Ad Hoc Working Group and given concept
      clearance by the September 1993 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council. The
      initiative was released in January 1994.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Patient enrollment started in August 1995. Patients scheduled for transfusion were entered
      into the study at the time of their first transfusion and randomized to receive leukopoor
      red cells filtered within 24 hours of collection or unmanipulated blood components. Patients
      received blood as per their treatment arm as needed for one or two years. Patients were
      stratified to those with CD4 counts below 50 /MM3 (most patients) and those with CD4 counts
      above that level. Primary endpoints were overall survival and a change in HIV viremia after
      the 1st transfusion. The secondary endpoint was the occurrence of a new AIDS-defining
      complication. A substudy looked at donor lymphocytes in the immunosuppressed recipients to
      help determine why AIDS patients don't seem to get post-transfusion graft-vs-host disease.
      The patient recruitment time was extended for one year because of low accrual. With new
      drugs, especially protease inhibitors, the proportion of patients needing transfusion has
      decreased. The patients are less severely ill and their disease produces less anemia.
      Furthermore, the new drugs don't have anemia as a side effect. The trial ended in January,
      2000.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      HIV-infected patients with CD4 counts below 250 who clinically needed red blood cell
        transfusions.
