TITLE:
      Neurodevelopmental and Neurological Study of Infants and Children With HIV-1 Infection and AIDS in Clinical Trials
SUMMARY:
      AS PER AMENDMENT 10/24/96: To develop a domain/construct-driven neuropsychological and
      neurological battery. Scaling of instruments to allow measurement of functions from infancy
      to early adulthood; establish reliability and validity of the new instruments developed for
      the NIMH Neurodevelopmental Battery. Downward extension of cognitive domains into infancy
      and early childhood. To describe and compare outcomes when assessing level of development
      versus rate of change. Describe and compare the outcomes from a global assessment of
      neurodevelopment (e.g., a standardized I.Q. score) versus discrete assessments (e.g.,
      functional domains such as motor or language skills). Develop guidelines for multicultural
      neuropsychological and neurological assessment within a clinical trials design. Describe the
      nature of impaired developmental abilities and course of the disease in infants and
      children.

      The assessment of children who sustain central nervous system (CNS) insult requires
      approaches that differ in several ways from adult-based assessment. The rapid changes that
      occur in the developing CNS as well as in behavior reflect underlying processes of growth
      and development.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The assessment of children who sustain central nervous system (CNS) insult requires
      approaches that differ in several ways from adult-based assessment. The rapid changes that
      occur in the developing CNS as well as in behavior reflect underlying processes of growth
      and development.

      This study will be conducted as a nested substudy within ACTG 152. AS PER AMENDMENT
      10/24/97: ACTG 188 was originally a nested study within ACTG 152, a three-arm clinical drug
      trial, but, due to recruitment limitations, expanded to include other protocol and
      non-protocol children with HIV-1 infection.

      It will include 225 HIV-infected patients from ACTG 152, as well as an additional 450
      non-infected participants recruited for two comparison groups, one consisting of
      seronegative infants and children with perinatal exposure to HIV and a second group without
      perinatal exposure to HIV. AS PER AMENDMENT 10/24/96: Patients in the HIV-unexposed and
      uninfected group are discontinued from the study and remaining patients are reassigned to
      two new age groups: 3 months to 41 months and 30 days or 42 months to 9 years, 11 months, 30
      days. Patients 33 months or older but less than 42 months are discontinued from the study,
      those patients less than 33 months at the time of enrollment are graduated from the study at
      the age of 42 months.

      A neurological assessment battery will evaluate the following domains: growth, sensory,
      tone, motor, posture, locomotion, hand use, deep tendon reflexes, abnormal movements,
      language, and behavior. Participants will be asked to do different kinds of activities such
      as talking, listening, and drawing, and to play games that involve walking, jumping,
      concentration, and memory. All participants will be assessed at clinic visits and followed
      for 72 weeks. AS PER AMENDMENT 10/23/97: A modified version of the neurological battery will
      be discontinued from interim follow-up evaluations and will be administered one last time as
      part of the exit evaluation.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Participants must have:

        AS PER AMENDMENT 10/24/96:

          -  Signed, informed consent from a parent or legal guardian for patients under 18 years
             of age.

        HIV-Infected Group: Documentation of HIV infection from a state-licensed lab as follows:
        Children > one month of age:

          -  Documentation of current or prior enrollment in an investigational drug therapy or
             other research protocol in which the protocol inclusion criteria specify HIV
             infection OR laboratory evidence of vertically transmitted HIV infection as
             demonstrated on two separate peripheral blood samples by either a positive viral
             culture (blood or cerebrospinal fluid) OR detectably serum p24 antigen OR positive
             HIV-DNA PCR.

        Children >= 18 months of age:

          -  Fulfillment of above criteria OR >= 2 positive tests for HIV antibody (two different
             specimens) determined by a federally-licensed test kit for detection of antibody,
             confirmed by an independent supplemental test.

          -  Documentation of presumption of maternal HIV infection at or prior to the birth of
             the child.

        HIV-Exposed, Uninfected Group: Children < 18 months of age:

          -  At least two negative tests for direct detection of HIV (viral culture and/or antigen
             detection and/or PCR assay and normal immunologic function.

        Children >= 18 months of age:

          -  Negative serological test by an FDA-licensed test kit for detection of HIV antibody
             performed on a specimen obtained at >= 18 months of age.

          -  Documentation of presence of maternal HIV infection at or prior to the birth of the
             child.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following conditions are excluded:

        AS PER AMENDMENT 10/24/96:

          -  Central nervous system (CNS) disorders including poorly controlled seizure disorder
             while on anticonvulsant therapy, evidence of neuroimaging abnormality resulting from
             a traumatic brain injury or major congenital malformations associated with CNS
             dysfunction.

          -  Genetic diseases including:

          -  inborn errors of metabolism, inherited genetic diseases that would compromise CNS
             function, chromosomal disorder that would compromise CNS function, cystic fibrosis,
             muscular dystrophy, sickle cell anemia.

          -  Juvenile onset diabetes.

          -  Organ transplant recipients.

          -  Deafness or blindness.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Intrathecal or intraventricular chemotherapy.

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Cranial or spinal radiation therapy.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  Traumatic brain injury with loss of consciousness of > 24 hours and/or skull
             fracture.

          -  Prematurity including:

          -  intraventricular hemorrhage > grade 2, requirement for mechanical ventilation for >
             28 days, seizures or another perinatal brain injury history including history of
             hydrocephaly.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Intrathecal or intraventricular chemotherapy.

        Prior Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Cranial or spinal radiation therapy.
