TITLE:
      Physicians' Health Study
SUMMARY:
      To assess the effect on cardiovascular mortality of alternate-day consumption of 325
      milligrams of aspirin and, secondarily, the effect on cancer incidence of alternate-day
      consumption of 50 milligrams of beta-carotene.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Thrombosis plays a major role in the late stages of coronary occlusion. Platelet aggregation
      is a large component in the formation of arterial thrombi. In pharmacologic studies, aspirin
      has been shown to inhibit platelet aggregation and, therefore, might be expected to prevent
      coronary occlusion. These effects are apparent in the dose range of l00-l000 mg/day, and may
      be most evident at l60 milligrams daily. Higher doses seem to be no more effective in either
      inhibition of platelet agreeability or prolonged bleeding time.

      Although an early case-control study by Jick and Miettinen showed a large benefit, most
      observational studies had shown a cardiovascular benefit of about 20 percent. Conclusive
      data could only result from a randomized trial with a large sample size.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, fixed sample. Participants were randomized into one of four
      treatment groups: one 325 milligram aspirin tablet every other day, alternating with one 30
      milligram capsule of beta-carotene; one aspirin every other day, alternating with one
      capsule of beta-carotene placebo; one aspirin placebo tablet every other day, alternating
      with one capsule of beta-carotene; and one aspirin placebo tablet every other day,
      alternating with one capsule of beta-carotene placebo. Major endpoints for the
      cardiovascular component of the study were cardiovascular mortality, total mortality, and
      coronary events.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Male physicians, ages 40 to 84. No history of stroke, myocardial infarction, cancer, or
        renal disease. No contraindications to aspirin or beta-carotene. No current usage of
        aspirin or Vitamin A tables greater than once per week.
