TITLE:
      Erythropoietin for Anemia Due to Zidovudine in Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether administration of human recombinant erythropoietin (REPO) improved or
      eliminated the anemia seen in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infected patients after
      therapy with zidovudine (ZDV).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Reports had shown that between 24 and 78 percent of patients with Acquired Immune Deficiency
      Syndrome treated with zidovudine for four to six months developed significant bone marrow
      toxicity, requiring zidovudine dosage alterations, blood transfusions, or cessation of
      therapy. While zidovudine efficacy had been demonstrated in patients with AIDS or ARC, it
      was also evaluated in patients with AIDS-related illness, as well as in asymptomatic
      HIV-infected individuals. The clinically significant zidovudine-induced anemia developing in
      a substantial number of these patient groups and requiring blood transfusions could cause a
      significant drain on the blood supply in the United States.

      The project was part of an Institute-initiated study on the Pathobiology of Bone Marrow
      Suppression in AIDS or AIDS-Related Complex. The concept was approved at the May 1987
      National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council. The Request for Applications was released
      in December 1987.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Double-blind, placebo-controlled. Patients received intravenous REPO (1000 IU/kg) or placebo
      twice per week. The five patients in Group A had no transfusion history. The five patients
      in Group B had a history of transfusions. Prior to the study, the authors determined that
      treatment would continue for twelve weeks or until the hemoglobin reached 12.5 g/dl. After
      the twelve week study period, patients were eligible to receive open label erythropoietin
      (500 IU/kg, twice a week). For numerous reasons, recruitment of patients was a major problem
      in this trial. The study originally estimated a total of 64 patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      No eligibility criteria
