TITLE:
      Platelet Drug Trial in Coronary Disease Progression
SUMMARY:
      To determine the effectiveness of the platelet inhibitor drugs dipyridamole and aspirin in
      reducing the angiographic progression of coronary artery disease over a five-year period and
      to test the predictive value of the platelet survival half-life in identifying patients with
      more rapid progression of coronary disease and development of its complications.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Coronary atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death in this country and the developed
      countries of the world. Although modern coronary care units have resulted in a markedly
      decreased hospital mortality from acute myocardial infarction, especially in those patients
      who enter the hospital early, its overall impact is limited since two-thirds of patients who
      die from coronary disease do not reach the hospital. When the trial was initiated in 1979,
      new approaches to the medical treatment of coronary disease and its complications were
      needed with an effort directed towards prevention of its progression and prevention of its
      complications through medical therapy. This prevention could save significant health care
      dollars over the long-term especially if the need for aortocoronary bypass graft surgery and
      the incidence of myocardial infarction could be reduced. Early identification of the patient
      at risk of developing coronary disease or of those with early coronary artery lesions would
      allow a greater impact of any successful intervention therapy.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind. The patients in the experimental group were treated with
      dipyridamole and aspirin for five years. Patients in the control group received a lactose
      placebo. The primary endpoint was angiographic evidence of progression of coronary artery
      disease and development of new coronary disease. Secondary endpoints included total
      mortality, cardiac mortality, mortality due to myocardial infarction, and incidence of new
      myocardial infarction. Recruitment ended in December 1982.

      The study completion date listed in this record was obtained from the statement immediately
      above ("Recruitment ended in December 1982") and was confirmed from the Query/View/Report
      (QVR) System.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Patients aged 65 or less. Angiographically identified coronary heart disease
