TITLE:
      Program on Surgical Control of Hyperlipidemias (POSCH)
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether a profound reduction in serum cholesterol level, induced and maintained
      by partial ileal bypass, would prevent a second heart attack among men and women who had one
      myocardial infarction and whose blood cholesterol could not be reduced sufficiently by diet.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The correlative evidence linking elevated cholesterol to increased risk of cardiovascular
      disease is incontrovertible. Animal studies have shown that significant reductions in
      disease in humans may be forthcoming if blood lipids are reduced from elevated levels.
      Beginning in the 1960s, some patients had undergone a surgical bypass procedure for
      hyperlipidemia. Patients were selected for surgery after dietary management had been carried
      out for three years. The average serum cholesterol concentrations decreased markedly and the
      decrease was sustained.

      This grant-supported clinical trial attempted to determine the effect on cardiovascular
      morbidity and mortality of the partial ileal bypass in patients who had suffered a
      myocardial infarction within the previous 5 years and who had serum cholesterol over 220 mg
      deciliter (200 mg if LDL cholesterol was over l40 mg).

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, non-blind, fixed sample study with a control group and an experimental group of
      equal size. The experimental group received a partial ileal bypass and diet therapy to
      reduce serum cholesterol and triglycerides. The control group was given conventional medical
      therapy exclusive of cholesterol-lowering drugs. The primary endpoint was death due to any
      cause. Secondary endpoints included death due to atherosclerosis and morbidity from
      recurrent myocardial infarction, unstable angina, cerebrovascular accident. Other secondary
      endpoints included coronary artery bypass surgery, percutaneous transluminal coronary
      angioplasty, cardiac transplantation, and peripheral vascular surgery.

      Beginning in January 1993, long-term morbidity and mortality follow-up are continuing
      through December 1997 under grant support (R01HL49522). Follow-up includes tracking
      morbidity and mortality by an annual telephone survey and review of patient records,
      including death and autopsy results. In addition, mortality and morbidity will be correlated
      with lipid changes and existing arteriographic results. The long-term course of control
      patients treated with the AHA Phase II Diet counseling will be assessed and the long-term
      side effects of partial ileal bypass will be evaluated.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 30 to 64. Had one myocardial infarction. Had hyperlipoproteinemia.
