TITLE:
      Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy in Unstable Angina
SUMMARY:
      To determine if estrogen therapy in postmenopausal women with unstable angina reduces the
      incidence of ischemic episodes.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Unstable angina is a frequent diagnosis in post-menopausal women and is associated with a
      significant risk of myocardial infarction and need for revascularization. The pathogenesis
      of unstable angina involves vasoconstriction superimposed on fixed disease, causing a
      temporary decrease in coronary blood flow. Recent catheterization studies in patients with
      atherosclerosis utilizing quantitative angiography and intracoronary doppler measurements of
      blood flow velocity suggest that endothelial dysfunction results in a paradoxical coronary
      vasoconstriction response to certain neurohumoral stimuli including acetylcholine,
      catecholamines, and serotonin with resultant myocardial ischemia. Therapeutic agents which
      prevent or limit this vasoconstriction may prevent recurrent ischemia and/or myocardial
      infarction in unstable angina patients. Recently, estrogen receptors were identified in the
      smooth muscle of post-mortem human coronary arteries. Work in animal models and studies in
      post-menopausal women suggest that intravenous estrogen acutely decreases coronary vascular
      resistance, increases coronary blood flow, and prevents the paradoxical response to
      acetylcholine in patients with endothelial dysfunction.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center trial tested the hypothesis
      that intravenous estrogen followed by oral estrogen and the combination of intravenous and
      oral estrogen and progesterone in the routine management of unstable angina were beneficial
      compared with placebo in post-menopausal women. Subjects with rest angina and no
      contraindications to hormone therapy were randomized to receive intravenous followed by oral
      conjugated estrogen for 21 days, intravenous estrogen followed by oral conjugated estrogen
      plus medroxyprogesterone for 21 days or placebo. The primary end point was the number of
      ambulatory electrocardiographic ischemic events over the first 48 hours. Clinical events
      were also determined over six months of follow-up.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Postmenopausal women with unstable angina.
