TITLE:
      Palestinian Perineum and Birth Complication Study
SUMMARY:
      In this study the investigators want to assess complications associated to pregnancy and
      delivery, and interventions used during labor.

      Pregnancy and delivery related complications are a major health problem globally. Events
      during labor such as excessive bleeding, uterine rupture, emergency cesarean delivery; other
      instrumental deliveries and anesthesia problems are situations that potentially may lead to
      severe outcomes for the mother and child.

      Diabetes, anemia and hypertensive disorders may also complicate both the pregnancy and
      delivery.

      Between 60-80% of women delivering their first baby need suturing due to perineal tears
      (tears located to the area between the vagina and anus). Superficial perineal tears rarely
      cause long-term problems, but often lead to pain and discomfort immediately after birth.
      Deeper or severe perineal tears, involving the anal sphincter, may influence the woman's
      quality of life. This is mainly due to long-lasting pain, discomfort and sexual dysfunction,
      and the fact that obstetric anal sphincter tear is the main cause of anal incontinence.
      Recent clinical intervention studies have shown that the incidence of severe obstetric
      perineal tears may be reduced by 50-70% by introducing a bimanual support technique of the
      perineum. In these studies all midwives and gynecologists were trained in the bimanual
      support technique. When it comes to training in new medical techniques in general, some
      studies have shown that use of animated instructions on mobile phones may be a good
      alternative to the more traditional "hands-on" or "bedside" teaching methods. In a global
      perspective, it is important to study the efficacy of mobile units for transferring of new
      knowledge, especially for use in resource constrained settings.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The main aim is to study the incidence of major delivery complications and perineal injuries
      during vaginal delivery in Palestine. A manual support technique of perineum will be
      introduced.

        1. To assess the incidence of perineal tears, episiotomies, obstetric anal sphincter
           injuries and major obstetric complications in Palestine in a multicenter study
           involving three hospitals on the West Bank and three hospitals in Gaza.

        2. To assess the present treatment of obstetric anal sphincter tears in Palestine.

        3. To study whether intervention with bed-side training of the hands-on "the
           Norwegian-Finnish" support technique reduce the incidence of obstetric anal sphincter
           tears.

        4. To study whether training by animated instructions of the same hands-on support
           technique, using smart phones or tablet computers, reduce the incidence of obstetric
           anal sphincter injuries.

        5. To compare results between the two different training methods.

        6. To study midwives' and doctors' attitudes towards "hands-on" training compared to
           training by animated instructions. The main aim is to assess the incidence of perineal
           injuries during vaginal delivery in Palestine, and to introduce a manual support
           technique of perineum. Norwegian intervention studies have shown that the incidence of
           obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS) can be reduced by 40-70% by improving
           hands-on delivering techniques. The reduction was achieved by educating all staff on
           the delivery unit, implementing a new hands-on delivering technique. Some previous
           research has shown that non-interactive training by animated instructions or videos in
           emergency obstetric care, might be equally effective as conventional interactive
           hands-on training. However, the effectiveness of training by animated instructions
           compared to conventional training programs remains to be assessed properly. By
           performing a multicentre intervention study, the investigators will explore the effect
           of interactive hands-on training on the incidence of perineal injuries. Likewise the
           investigators will study effect of non-interactive training by animated instructions.
           Three hospitals on the West Bank (WB) and three in Gaza have accepted to participate.
           The investigators will also assess whether attitudes towards training methods influence
           the results.

      The steps of observation, training and interventions in this study:

        1. Intervention 1 (1 month):

           Education in diagnosis and repair of perineal injuries and implementation of system to
           register data.

        2. Observation 1 (6 months):

           Data-registration baseline.

        3. Intervention 2, (6 months):

           First part:

           In all participating hospitals, the training in hands-on manual perineal protection
           will be communicated by animated instruction accessible on tablet computers and smart
           phones. The information and instructions how to perform the manual perineal protection
           is transferred for the users by instruction video showing the method as an animation
           with voice-over in Arabic and English. All 6 hospitals implement this intervention
           simultaneously.

           Second part, the stepped wedge approach:

           After one month the first hospitals starts with the traditional bedside hands-on
           training of the midwives and physicians. Norwegian midwives and obstetricians support
           this training. The traditional bedside training then starts stepwise in the 6
           hospitals, one month after each other, in a stepped wedge model.

        4. Observation 2 (12 months):

      There will be a one year observational period where all data is collected.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  all midwives and physicians working on labor ward in the participating hospitals.

          -  all women giving birth in the participating hospitals.

          -  both genders are included in the staff, and among the newborns

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  no exclusion criteria, the study aim is the education of the staff, and hospitals are
             compared as units.
