TITLE:
      Pilot Study for the SQUEEZE Trial
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of the SQUEEZE Trial is to determine which fluid resuscitation strategy results
      in the best outcomes for children treated for suspected or confirmed septic shock. In this
      study, eligible children will be randomized to either the 'Usual Care Arm' or the 'Fluid
      Sparing Arm'. Children will receive treatment according to current ACCM Septic Shock
      Resuscitation Guidelines, with the assigned resuscitation strategy used to guide
      administration of further fluid boluses as well as the timing of initiation and escalation
      of vasoactive medications to achieve ACCM recommended hemodynamic targets.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Current pediatric surviving sepsis guidelines from the American College of Critical Care
      Medicine (ACCM) emphasize an early and goal-directed approach to resuscitation. These
      guidelines suggest that fluid resuscitation should be aggressive with repeated intravenous
      (IV) fluid boluses of 20 mL/kg, such that some children may require as much as 200 mL/kg of
      fluid to achieve therapeutic endpoints. The guidelines also recommend the initiation of
      vasoactive agents at the stage of "fluid refractory shock", i.e. when there is persistent
      hypoperfusion despite at least 60 ml/kg IV fluid. Improvements in pediatric septic shock
      survival have been attributed to adherence to the first iteration of the ACCM septic shock
      guidelines, and the use of goal directed targets. However, the largest and most publicized
      pediatric trial of fluid resuscitation in children with suspected septic shock (FEAST
      Trial), published in NEJM in 2011, demonstrated an increased mortality among children
      treated with aggressive fluid resuscitation in comparison to the conservative fluid
      resuscitation arm. As a result, the pediatric critical care community clearly acknowledges
      that these results, while important, are not necessarily generalizable to developed
      countries such as Canada.

      Emerging publications in the ICU literature suggest that excessive compared to conservative
      fluid administration in adults with septic shock worsens outcomes such as duration of
      mechanical ventilation, complications related to the third-spacing of fluids, length of ICU
      stay, and mortality. A systematic review published in August 2012 reveals a paucity of
      randomized controlled trial (RCT) evidence apart from the FEAST trial examining the impact
      of fluid resuscitation on mortality in children with septic shock. This raises the important
      question of whether children in developed countries would also benefit from a fluid sparing
      resuscitation strategy to achieve the ACCM goal-directed targets. Use of such a fluid
      sparing strategy would, by default, require earlier initiation and preferential escalation
      of vasoactive medications to meet ACCM hemodynamic goals. The optimal degree of fluid
      resuscitation and the timing of initiation of vasoactive support in order to achieve
      therapeutic targets in children with septic shock remains unanswered.

      This Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial constitutes the first step in answering our research
      question of whether, in pediatric patients with septic shock, use of a fluid sparing
      strategy to achieve ACCM therapeutic goals, results in improved clinical outcomes without an
      increased risk of adverse events, compared to the usual care of aggressive fluid
      resuscitation as currently recommended by the ACCM guidelines. The purpose of the pilot
      study is to determine feasibility and inform the appropriate methodological design of the
      larger multi-centre RCT to fully answer our research question. The hypothesis of the pilot
      study is that the SQUEEZE Trial is feasible to conduct.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Inclusion Criteria for 1 and 3 must be answered YES to be eligible for study.

        1. Age 29 days to less than 18 years of age

        2a) Patient has Persistent Signs of Shock including one or more of the following: i)
        Vasoactive Medication Dependence ii) Hypotension (Systolic Blood Pressure and/or Mean
        Blood Pressure less than the 5th percentile for age) iii) Abnormal Perfusion (2 or more
        of: abnormal capillary refill, tachycardia, decreased level of consciousness, decreased
        urine output)

        2b) Suspected or Confirmed Septic Shock (Shock due to Suspected or Confirmed Infectious
        Cause)

        2c) Patient has received initial fluid resuscitation of: Minimum of 40 mL/kg of isotonic
        crystalloid (0.9% Normal Saline and/or Ringer's Lactate) and/or colloid (5% albumin) as
        fluid boluses within the previous 2 hours for patients weighing less than 50 kg, OR
        Minimum of 2 litres (2000 mL) of isotonic crystalloid (0.9% Normal Saline and/or Ringer's
        Lactate) and/or colloid (5% albumin) as fluid boluses within the previous 2 hours for
        patients weighing 50 kg or more

        3. Patient has Fluid Refractory Septic Shock as defined by the Presence of all of 2a, 2b,
        and 2c.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patient located in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)

          -  Patient located in the Operating Room (OR) or Post-Anesthetic Care Unit (PACU)

          -  Full Active Resuscitative Treatment Not Within the Goals of Care

          -  Shock Secondary to Cause other than Sepsis (i.e. obvious signs of cardiogenic shock,
             anaphylactic shock, hemorrhagic shock, spinal shock)
