TITLE:
      Safety of Estrogens in Lupus: Hormone Replacement Therapy
SUMMARY:
      Safety of Estrogens in Lupus Erythematosus - National Assessment (SELENA) is a study to test
      whether postmenopausal women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, or lupus) can safely
      use the hormone estrogen. In this part of the study, we will look at the effects of estrogen
      replacement therapy on the activity and severity of disease in women with SLE.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This study tests the effect of exogenous female hormones on disease activity and severity in
      women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Physicians generally do not prescribe hormone
      replacement therapy (HRT) to women with SLE because of the widely held view that such
      treatment can activate SLE. This practice is based on the greater incidence of SLE in women
      than in men, biologic abnormalities of estrogen metabolism, murine models of lupus, several
      anecdotes of patients having disease flares while receiving exogenous hormones, and a single
      retrospective study in patients with preexisting renal disease. By contrast, recent
      retrospective studies suggest that the rate of flare is not significantly increased in
      patients taking HRT.

      We will examine, in a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, the
      effect of hormonal replacement with conjugated estrogens on disease activity in
      postmenopausal women with SLE. We will recruit patients from clinics and private practices
      that include over 4,000 women with SLE, most belonging to minority groups.

      We will give patients hormones for 1 year.

      NOTE: This trial has been terminated as of August 2002 upon recommendation of the Data
      Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), based on the findings of the WHI Trial. Study subjects have
      discontinued study drug but will continue followup visits to study doctors through May 2003
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Female

          -  Unequivocal diagnosis of SLE

          -  Inactive disease or stable on 0.5 mg/kg/day or less of prednisone

          -  Chemical evidence of menopause or have stopped periods for at least 6 months

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Blood pressure >145/95 on three occasions

          -  Deep vein, arterial thrombosis or pulmonary embolus

          -  GPL >40; MPL >40; APL >50; dRVVT >37 sec

          -  APL antibody syndrome ever

          -  Gynecologic or breast cancer

          -  Hepatic dysfunction or liver tumors

          -  Diabetes mellitus (NOT due to steroids) with vascular disease

          -  Congenital hyperlipidemia

          -  Complicated migraine

          -  Severe disease activity (SLEDAI >12)

          -  Increase in SLEDAI >2 points in 3 months

          -  Unexplained vaginal bleeding

          -  Use of estrogen (HRT or OCP) for >1 month at any time after SLE diagnosis

          -  FSH <40

          -  Premenopausal myocardial infarction
