TITLE:
      Analgesic Efficacy of Morphine Alone or Combined With Paracetamol and/or Ibuprofen for Long-bones Fractures in Children
SUMMARY:
      The main objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of two drugs: paracetamol and
      ibuprofen in association with morphine, compared with morphine alone on analgesia in
      children seen in the emergency department for a long-bone fracture and also to study the
      potential synergic effect of the association paracetamol and ibuprofen.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Long-bone fractures are a very common complain for visits in paediatric emergency
      departments. Since these fractures are often very painful, morphine is considered the
      cornerstone treatment in case of severe pain. Very few data are available concerning the
      assessment of analgesic treatment in this condition. In our previous study, less than 50% of
      patients with a limb fracture had a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) ≤ 30 mm after morphine
      administration. Thus, one study make the hypothesis that the use of a combination of
      morphine and/or paracetamol and/or NSAID could be an effective and safe option for the
      treatment of pain due to long bone fractures. We undertake to compare different combinations
      of paracetamol and ibuprofen with morphine to determine the efficacy and safety of these
      strategies in emergency department paediatric patients with acute traumatic limb pain.

      The main objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of two drugs: paracetamol and
      ibuprofen in association with morphine, compared with morphine alone on analgesia in
      children seen in the emergency department for a long-bone fracture and also to study the
      potential synergic effect of the association paracetamol and ibuprofen.

      Second objectives are

        -  to compare the long term analgesic efficacy of 4 analgesic regimens
           a)ibuprofen/morphine, b)paracetamol/morphine, c)ibuprofen/paracetamol/morphine and
           d)morphine for long bone fracture management in the paediatric emergency department.

        -  To assess the tolerance of these 4 regimens.

      The study is considered as a success if children 2-6 years (6 years included) have a pain
      score Evendol < 5 and children 7-17 years (17 years included) have a pain score assessed by
      Visual Analog Scale (VAS) ≤ 30 without additional analgesic treatment 30 minutes after drug
      administration.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  children aged 2 through 17 years (17 years included) accompanied by at least one of
             their parents in the emergency department

          -  accompanied by at least one of their parents in the emergency department

          -  suspected fracture of a long bone requiring morphine analgesia (VAS ≥ 60/100 or
             Evendol ≥ 7/15 at the inclusion)

          -  within the first 12 hours after the injury

          -  at least one signed parental informed consent

          -  affiliated to health insurance

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  analgesic treatment within the 6 hours before inclusion

          -  contraindication to one of the study drug

          -  cognitive impairment

          -  multiple injuries

          -  resuscitation manœuvres

          -  open fracture

          -  non affiliated to social security

          -  parental refusal
