TITLE:
      Functional Outcomes of Awake vs. Asleep Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) for Essential Tremor
SUMMARY:
      Recently, there has been increasing interest in performing DBS under general anesthesia,
      where the stimulated targets are located anatomically (i.e. on MRI) rather than
      physiologically via microelectrode recordings and intra-operative test stimulation. This
      technology has been termed "asleep" DBS and is performed with the patient under general
      anesthesia. Intraoperative imaging is utilized to verify the stereotactic accuracy of DBS
      electrodes placement at the time of surgery. Because stereotactic accuracy (and surgical
      safety) is the surgical endpoint, there is no need for the patient to be awake during the
      procedure.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Traditional DBS is performed without general anesthesia with the patient awake. Local
      anesthetic is used to numb the skin and tissue where the incision is made, and the patients
      are given mild sedatives to alleviate anxiety and discomfort. Essential tremor (ET) patients
      undergo intra-operative test stimulation to refine the lead location and ensure the absence
      of sustained side effects. This can result in multiple brain penetrations during lead
      placement, and the entire procedure may last anywhere from 4-6 hours on average. The concept
      of being awake during brain surgery provokes significant anxiety and fear in some patients.

      Recently, there has been increasing interest in performing DBS under general anesthesia,
      where the stimulated targets are located anatomically (i.e. on MRI) rather than
      physiologically via microelectrode recordings and intra-operative test stimulation. This
      technology has been termed "asleep" DBS and is performed with the patient under general
      anesthesia. Intraoperative imaging is utilized to verify the stereotactic accuracy of DBS
      electrodes placement at the time of surgery. Because stereotactic accuracy (and surgical
      safety) is the surgical endpoint, there is no need for the patient to be awake during the
      procedure.

      If asleep DBS produces clinical results equivalent to awake DBS surgery, the possible
      advantages include shorter surgical time, improved patient comfort, better access to DBS for
      patients, and cost savings for the hospital.

      To date (August 2011 - September 2014), 157 patients have undergone asleep DBS surgery and
      141 patients have undergone traditional awake DBS surgery. ET patients constitute 76 of the
      total surgeries - 50 patients underwent awake surgery and 26 underwent asleep surgery. The
      safety and efficacy of the two approaches to DBS surgery have been equivalent, and we are at
      a position of equipoise with regard to what to offer to patients. To date, there have been
      no randomized, controlled clinical trials comparing the efficacy and functional outcomes of
      the two DBS methods for patients with the diagnosis of Essential tremor. The purpose of the
      proposed study is to demonstrate that the functional outcomes of the "asleep" technique are
      not inferior to those reported for traditional "awake" DBS technique. The primary data
      points for this study will include three month functional outcomes using accepted outcome
      metrics for ET, including an objective tremor rating scale (Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating
      Scale), a tremor Activities of Daily Living (ADL) questionnaire (Bain and Findley Tremor ADL
      scale), and a tremor quality of life questionnaire : Quality of Life in Essential Tremor
      Questionnaire [QUEST]). Parkinson Meter and Life Pulse tremor readings (two iPhone
      accelerometer applications) will also be collected. . Patients who elect to participate in
      this trial will undergo a routine pre-operative neurocognitive evaluation consisting of the
      following routine evaluative tests: Wechsler Test of Adult Reading, Mattis Dementia Rating
      Scale 2nd Edition, Wechsler Abbreviate Scale of Intelligence 2nd Edition; Wechsler Memory
      Scale 3rd edition, Digit Span, Stroop Neuropsychological Screening Test, Trail Making Test,
      Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, Controlled Oral Word Association Test, Animal Naming, Boston
      Naming Test, Wechsler Memory Scale 4th Edition, Logical Memory, Hopkins Verbal Learning Test
      - Revised, Brief Visuospatial Memory Test - Revised, Hooper visual Organization Test,
      Judgment of Line Orientation, Beck Depression Inventory, Beck Anxiety Inventory, Epworth
      Sleepiness Scale. The subjects will then be randomized to 2 groups by using random numbers
      in an envelope system. We anticipate that 120 total patients will need to be enrolled in
      this pilot study (60 awake, 60 asleep), and thus the numbers 1-120 will be placed in
      envelopes. An odd number will correspond to the awake DBS procedure, and an even number will
      indicate an asleep DBS procedure. The null hypothesis is that asleep DBS results in inferior
      tremor ratings 3-months after surgery when compared to awake DBS. Our secondary aim will be
      to evaluate any cognitive changes associated with DBS surgery selection (awake vs. asleep)
      in ET patients. Current standard of care for patient selection in DBS focuses primarily on
      the evaluation of motor symptoms and currently there is no guidance for how a patients' DBS
      surgery selection (awake vs. asleep) would impact on subsequent neurocognitive function.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Essential Tremor diagnosed by criteria listed in the Consensus statement of the
             Movement Disorders Society on Tremor

          -  Age 18 - 85 years of age

          -  Motor skills allowing for capability to complete evaluations

          -  Medically cleared for undergoing anesthesia and DBS surgery

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Dementia per DSM-V criteria

          -  Medical or other condition precluding MRI

          -  History of supraspinal CNS disease other than Essential Tremor

          -  Alcohol use of more than 4 drinks per day

          -  Pregnancy

          -  History of suicide attempt

          -  Currently uncontrolled clinically significant depression (BDI>20)

          -  History of schizophrenia, delusions, or currently uncontrolled visual hallucinations
