TITLE:
      Preventing Frequent Sinus Infections in HIV-Infected Patients
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the additional effectiveness of an anti-inflammatory nasal spray (
      beclomethasone dipropionate ) and a broad spectrum antibiotic ( cefuroxime axetil ) over
      decongestant ( Deconsal II ) alone, when these agents are given individually or in
      combination for the prevention of recurrent paranasal sinus infection in patients with HIV
      infection. To compare the clinical utility of paranasal sinus radiographs with computed
      tomograms (CTs) in the evaluation and management of HIV-infected patients with recurrent
      paranasal sinus infection. To determine relevant prognostic factors and the microbiologic
      etiology of maxillary sinusitis in this patient population.

      Sinusitis is common among HIV-infected patients and is likely to be recurrent or refractory
      to traditional therapy, particularly in patients with advanced immunosuppression. An
      intervention aimed at prevention of recurrent sinus disease in HIV-infected patients appears
      to be warranted.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Sinusitis is common among HIV-infected patients and is likely to be recurrent or refractory
      to traditional therapy, particularly in patients with advanced immunosuppression. An
      intervention aimed at prevention of recurrent sinus disease in HIV-infected patients appears
      to be warranted.

      Patients receive 21-42 days of antibiotic therapy for the defining episode of sinusitis.
      Following discontinuation of antibiotics, screening evaluations are performed. Within 7 days
      following completion of antibiotics, patients with clinical resolution begin 14 +/- 3 days
      of decongestant therapy with oral Deconsal II, a drug combining pseudoephedrine, a
      decongestant, and guaifenesin, an expectorant. Following decongestant therapy, patients
      undergo entry evaluations, including nasal endoscopy and sinus radiograph. Patients with
      continued clinical resolution and no purulence on endoscopy are then randomized to receive
      decongestant alone or in combination with nasal steroid (beclomethasone dipropionate) or
      antibiotic (cefuroxime axetil) or both. Treatment continues for a minimum of 52 weeks and a
      maximum of 104 weeks. Patients are followed at weeks 4, 8, and 12 and every 8 weeks
      thereafter.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Antiretroviral agents (both approved and investigational).

          -  Biologic response modifiers.

          -  Systemic chemotherapy.

          -  Chemoprophylaxis for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), candidiasis, and herpes.

          -  Adjuvant systemic corticosteroids with appropriate antibiotic therapy for moderate to
             severe PCP.

          -  Maintenance therapy with pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, amphotericin B, fluconazole,
             ketoconazole, or acyclovir.

          -  Treatment with ganciclovir, foscarnet, or antimycobacterial drugs for CMV disease or
             mycobacterial infections.

          -  Non-beta lactam antibacterial agents for other infections (beta lactam antibacterial
             agents are allowed if study drugs are temporarily discontinued).

          -  Antihistamines and saline nasal sprays.

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Allowed:

          -  Radiation therapy.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV infection.

          -  At least one episode of symptomatic maxillary sinusitis, with clinical resolution
             following antibiotic therapy.

          -  Life expectancy of at least 12 months.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Concurrent infection caused by cytomegalovirus or Mycobacterium avium Complex.

          -  Significant emotional disorder or psychosis.

          -  Conditions such as dementia that would substantially impair study compliance.

          -  Evidence of significant malabsorption, ileus, or significant emesis that would
             inhibit drug absorption.

          -  Inability to tolerate a minimum administration of one tablet of oral Deconsal II
             daily.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Prescription or over-the-counter nasal steroids, decongestants, or topical
             vasoconstrictors (ephedrine, oxymetazoline).

        Patients with the following prior condition are excluded:

          -  History of an acute hypersensitivity reaction to any penicillin or cephalosporin,
             characterized by urticaria, hypotension, or laryngeal edema.

        Active substance abuse that would impair study compliance.
