TITLE:
      Digitalis Investigation Group (DIG)
SUMMARY:
      To determine if digitalis had a beneficial, harmful, or no effect on total mortality in
      patients with clinical heart failure and sinus rhythm.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Despite widespread use of digitalis and its availability for nearly two centuries,
      uncertainty surrounded the appropriateness of its role and value in treating congestive
      heart failure patients in sinus rhythm. The study was a multicenter collaborative effort
      with the Department of Veteran Affairs Cooperative Studies Program which provided support
      for a data coordinating center and a pharmacy coordinating center.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, simple, multicenter, international trial with 186 centers in the
      United States and 116 in Canada. In the main trial, patients with left ventricular ejection
      fractions of 0.45 or less were randomly assigned to digoxin (3397 patients) or placebo (3403
      patients) in addition to diuretics and ACE inhibitors. In an ancillary trial of patients
      with ejection fractions greater than 0.45, 492 patients were randomly assigned to digoxin
      and 496 to placebo. Patients were recruited over a three-year period at the 302 centers and
      followed for a minimum of two years. Patient enrollment began in February 1991 and ended in
      September 1993. Follow-up ended in December 1995. The main results paper was published in
      1997.

      Three substudies were conducted. The quality of life/6-minute walk test substudy determined
      the effect of treatment on a patient's well-being, daily activities, and functional status.
      The Holter/signal averaging electrocardiogram substudy examined the pathophysiology of
      sudden cardiac death. The neurohormonal substudy determined whether long-term administration
      of digoxin attenuated the neuroendocrine response in patients with heart failure.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women with clinical heart failure, sinus rhythm, and an ejection fraction less
        than or equal to 45 percent.
