TITLE:
      Role of Metabolites in Nicotine Dependence (4) - 13
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine the effects of cotinine with or without a
      transdermal nicotine replacement on tobacco withdrawal symptoms.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Previous studies have shown that cotinine, a metabolite of nicotine, antagonizes some of the
      effects of nicotine. One study showed that nicotine eliminates some of the beneficial
      effects of the nicotine patch in reducing withdrawal symptoms. The purpose of this study was
      to replicate and extend these findings and examine the effects of various doses of cotinine
      base compared placebo on withdrawal symptom as well as drug preference among abstinent
      smokers while using the nicotine patch. We hypothesized that cotinine will reduce the
      beneficial effects of the nicotine patch in reducing withdrawal symptoms and that placebo
      will be preferred over cotinine during the forced drug choice period.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Male/Female subjects, aged 21-45 years inclusive, with a smoking history of at least 20
        cigarettes daily (greater than or equal to 50) for at lease 1 year. Subject is in good
        health as verified by medical history, screening examination, and screening laboratory
        tests as outlined above. Subject has provided written informed consent to participate in
        the study and is motivated to stop smoking. Subject has experienced at least 4 withdrawal
        symptoms upon abstinence.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        History of myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, sustained or episodic cardiac
        arrhythmias, symptomatic peripheral vascular disease, current peptic ulcer disease or any
        other medical condition which the physician investigator deems inappropriate for subject
        participation. Insulin-dependent diabetes. Pregnant or lactating, or not using adequate
        birth control methods. Requirement of any form of regular psychotropic medication
        (antidepressants, antipsychotics, or anxiolytics) and recent psychiatric history (less
        than 1yr). Chronic use of systemic steroids or antihistamines. Abuse of alcohol or any
        other recreation aor prescription drug (more tha 3 drinks per day or 21 drinks per week).
        Use of any other nicotine products, including smokeless tobacco, cigars and nicotine
        replacement products. Inability to fulfill all scheduled visits and examination procedures
        throughout the study period. History of schizophrenia or manic depressive disorder. Recent
        history of other psychiatric illness;less than 1 year since last episode of major
        depressive episode.
