TITLE:
      The Effect of Plaquenil on Serum Inflammatory Markers and Goiter in Euthyroid Young Women With Hashimoto's Thyroiditis
SUMMARY:
      Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is a common form of autoimmune thyroid disease, which affects
      up to 2% of general population. The annual incidence of HT worldwide is estimated to be 0.8
      - 3.5 cases per 1000 persons. The thyroid gland attacked by a variety of cell- and
      antibody-mediated immune processes. Various auto-antibodies may be present against TPO and
      Tg, and ADCC is a substantial factor behind the apoptotic fall-out of HT. Activation of
      cytotoxic T-lymphocytes in response to cell-mediated immune response affected by helper
      T-cells is central to thyrocyte destruction. Recent studies showed higher pro-inflammatory
      cytokines in serum of patients with HT, and suggested HT is associated with regulatory
      T-cells dysfunction, imbalance of ratio of Th1 cell and Th2 cell, overexpression of Th17
      cells.

      Several studies suggested that pregnant women with HT, even at euthyroid state had higher
      risk of spontaneous miscarriage, more frequent post-partum depression and higher depressive,
      anger, and total mood disturbance risk compared to those without HT. Presence of thyroid
      auto-antibodies is also associated with negative pregnant outcomes including gestational
      hypertension, late abortion, fetal death, premature delivery and neonatal respiratory
      distress. Neonates from mothers with ATD have higher rate of transient hypothyroidism.
      Children of mothers with ATD had higher risk of positive serum thyroid auto-antibodies and
      development of goiter and thyroid dysfunction. However, there is no suggested treatment for
      subjects with HT who have normal thyroid function. Low-iodine diet and regularly follow-up
      were suggested.

      Plaquenil (hydroxychloroquine) is an anti-malarial agent, and has been used to treat several
      autoimmune diseases, including lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis for more than a
      century. It reduced lymphocytes, production of auto-antibodies, cytokines, and immune
      mediators, NK cell activity, and inhibits antigens presenting to CD4 T-cells of B cells,
      dendritic cells and monocytes.

      This study focuses on the effect of Plaquenil on thyroid auto-antibodies, inflammatory
      markers, cytokines, and goiter size in euthyroid women with HT.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion criteria:

          -  Newly diagnosed (within 1 year) Hashimoto's thyroiditis by positive serum anti-TPO
             antibody or anti-thyroglobulin antibody

          -  Euthyroid state by serum free T4 and TSH level within normal limit

        Exclusion criteria:

          -  Pregnant, planning pregnant within 1 year, or lactating women

          -  Renal insufficiency, abnormal liver function test

          -  Hematologic diseases: anemia, agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia

          -  G6PD deficiency, porphyria cutaneous tarda

          -  Allergy to 4-aminoquinoline compounds

          -  Known retinopathy or visual field defect disorders

          -  Already receive immunosuppression therapy
