TITLE:
      Impact of Hyperarousal on Simple and Complex Cognitive Task Performance Among Insomnia Sufferers
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to learn more about people with insomnia disorder and cognitive
      impairment. Cognitive impairment is difficulty with mental abilities such as thinking,
      knowing and remembering.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Primary insomnia (PI) sufferers typically complain of such daytime impairments as reduced
      attention, concentration, memory and global mental acuity. Moreover, epidemiological studies
      have shown PI contributes to reduced productivity, work and traffic accidents, and serious
      falls among the elderly. Despite such findings, laboratory-based efforts to corroborate the
      cognitive complaints of PI sufferers have produced mixed results. Indeed, many studies
      comparing PI sufferers with non-complaining normal sleepers across a range of
      neuropsychological tests have failed to show any relative deficits among the PI group. Such
      findings, in turn, has led to the impression that PI patients cognitive complaints may be
      over-stated and result from their attentional bias toward minor cognitive errors,
      dysfunctional beliefs about the impact of insomnia on functioning or excessive self focus
      rather than to any measurable daytime impairment.

      However, many previous such studies were underpowered due to small sample sizes and employed
      neuropsychological tests designed for detecting impairment resulting from brain
      disease/damage rather than the more subtle albeit significant impairments of which PI
      patients complain. In recent research, we and others have shown that PI sufferers do,
      indeed, show greater deficits (slower and more variable reaction times) particularly on
      complex switching attention tasks. Moreover, there is some preliminary evidence that the
      subgroup of PI sufferers with elevated levels of physiological hyperarousal are most prone
      to suffer from neuro-cognitive performance deficits than are matched groups of PI sufferers
      who are not physiologically hyperaroused and normally alert individuals without insomnia.
      For example, Fernandez-Mendoza recently showed that PI sufferers with a hyperarousal pattern
      suggested by their objective short sleep duration on serial polysomnograms (PSG) performed
      more poorly on a complex switching attention task than did both normal sleepers and PI
      sufferers with normal objective sleep durations.

      In our efforts to follow up on this latter work, we recently examined the error rates of
      alert and sleepy PI sufferers and normal sleepers across a series of simple and complex
      reaction time tasks. We employed age and gender matched samples of PI (N=89) sufferers and
      normal sleepers-NS (N=95). Participants underwent three nights of PSG followed by daytime
      testing with a four-trial Multiple Sleep Latency Test-MSLT. The PI and NS groups were each
      subdivided into "alert" (e.g., MSLT mean onset latency > 8 minutes) and "sleepy" (e.g., MSLT
      mean onset latency < 8 minutes) subgroups to allow for testing the main and interaction
      effects of participant type and level of alertness. "Alert" participants had longer MSLT
      latencies than "sleepy" participants (12.7 vs. 5.4 minutes). PI sufferers had fewer correct
      responses on performance testing than did NS. However, as shown by the adjacent, figure we
      found a significant group x alertness interaction (p = .0013) with greater error rates
      occurring among alert (hyperaroused) PI sufferers (Mean=4.5±3.6 errors per trial) than among
      alert NS (Mean=2.6±1.9 errors per trial). This was particularly true for the more complex
      switching attention task.

      Our work along with that of Fernandez-Mendoza serve to confirm that PI sufferers have
      measureable objective neuro-cognitive deficits and provide some preliminary suggestion for
      the types of testing approaches that should be used to detect them. The identification of
      tests sensitive to PI sufferers' cognitive deficits are particularly relevant for testing
      the effects of current and future insomnia therapies on patients' objective daytime
      functioning. Measures of daytime dysfunction can and should serve as endpoints for assessing
      benefits and detriments of insomnia therapies. In addition, our recent work suggests that
      subgroups of PI sufferers may differ in their daytime deficits, with those showing
      physiological hyperarousal being most prone to make errors. This finding suggests that
      different types or doses of treatment may be needed to reverse the daytime impairments of
      the hyperaroused and non-aroused PI patients. However, our line of research would benefit by
      replication and extension findings to (1) further confirm the detrimental effects of
      physiological hyperarousal on PI sufferer's neuro-cognitive functioning; and (2) identify a
      broader range of tests that can be used for assessing diurnal cognitive impairments in both
      physiologically hyperaroused and lesser aroused PI groups. The current project will address
      these aims.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  21 to 80 years of age

          -  Insomnia sufferers enrolled, will meet Research Diagnostic Criteria for insomnia
             disorder

          -  score > 14 on the Insomnia Severity Index

          -  report insomnia for > 3 months

          -  have sleep difficulties > 3 nights per week

          -  score < 3 on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)

          -  score > 40 on the Hyperarousal Scale and report an inability to nap in the daytime

          -  The normal sleepers enrolled will report general satisfaction with sleep and no
             sleep/wake complaints, score < 10 on the ESS, score < 35 on the Hyperarousal Scale,
             and deny a practice of routine daytime napping

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  sleep-disruptive medical condition (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis)

          -  current major psychiatric (Axis I) condition on the basis of a Structured Clinical
             Interview for Psychiatric Disorders (SCID)

          -  sedative hypnotic dependence and unwillingness/inability to abstain from these
             medications while in the study

          -  use of anxiolytics, antidepressants, or any other psychotropic medication

          -  an apnea/hypopnea index (AHI) > 5 or a periodic limb movement-related arousal index >
             5 during on screening PSG that includes a full sleep montage to allow for
             detection/diagnosis of sleep-disordered breathing and PLMD

          -  female participants who have tested positive on urine pregnancy tests or planing on
             becoming pregnant during the study

          -  Additionally, self-described NS who meet criteria for any sleep disorder and those
             insomnia sufferers who meet criteria for a comorbid sleep disorder in addition to
             insomnia disorder will also be excluded
