TITLE:
      A Phase I Multicenter Trial to Evaluate the Safety and Immunogenicity of HIV-1 Recombinant Envelope Glycoprotein gp160
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the safety and immune response to 160 mcg HIV-1 recombinant envelope
      glycoprotein gp160. To evaluate the duration of antibody response and its relationship to
      dose and frequency of inoculation.

      Evaluation of previous patients who received doses of 40 or 80 mcg gp160 vaccine indicate
      that, although serum anti-gp160 antibody responses were detected, the level and duration of
      those responses were limited. A preliminary observation suggests that weak functional
      antibody responses may develop following the 18 month booster of 40 or 80 mcg; therefore, a
      dose of gp160 vaccine having potentially greater immunogenicity is of particular interest.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Evaluation of previous patients who received doses of 40 or 80 mcg gp160 vaccine indicate
      that, although serum anti-gp160 antibody responses were detected, the level and duration of
      those responses were limited. A preliminary observation suggests that weak functional
      antibody responses may develop following the 18 month booster of 40 or 80 mcg; therefore, a
      dose of gp160 vaccine having potentially greater immunogenicity is of particular interest.

      Healthy volunteers are injected on days 0, 30, 180, and 365 with either 160 mcg gp160
      vaccine (20 volunteers) or an alum placebo preparation (10 volunteers).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Subjects must have:

          -  Normal history and physical exam.

          -  Negative for HIV infection by ELISA and Western blot (i.e., no reactivity at gp160,
             gp120, gp41, or p24).

          -  T4 count >= 800 cells/mm3.

          -  Normal chest x-ray and urinalysis.

          -  Negative hepatitis B surface antigen.

          -  Negative HIV p24 antigen test.

          -  Normal skin reactivity by Merieux test.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Subjects with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Positive PPD.

          -  Syphilis, gonorrhea, or any other sexually transmitted diseases (including chlamydia
             or pelvic inflammatory disease).

        Subjects with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of immunodeficiency, chronic illness, or use of immunosuppressive
             medications.

          -  Syphilis, gonorrhea, or any other sexually transmitted diseases (including chlamydia
             or pelvic inflammatory disease) in the past 6 months.

        Prior Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Prior blood transfusions or cryoprecipitates within the past 6 months.

        Identifiable high-risk behavior for HIV infection (as determined by prescreening questions
        designed to identify risk factors for HIV infection), including:

          -  Any history of IV drug use.

          -  Syphilis, gonorrhea, or any other sexually transmitted diseases (including chlamydia
             or pelvic inflammatory disease) in the past 6 months.

          -  More than two sexual partners, or sexual contact with a high-risk partner, in the
             past 6 months.
