TITLE:
      Anti-hypertensive Effect of Mycelia of Antrodia Cinnamomea
SUMMARY:
      This the first report undertaken to assess the effect of supplementation with oral
      gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), adenosine and antrosterol-containing AC mycelia on blood
      pressure among people with mild hypertension. Overall, AC mycelia consumption for 8 weeks
      could successfully reduce mean diastolic and systolic BP through the suppression of PRA that
      is linked to downstream suppresion of angiotensin II formation, which further decreases the
      sympathetic outflow that leads to hypertension. In addition to blood pressure lowering
      properties, AC mycelia also has beneficial effect in reducing oxidative stress,
      significantly. No adverse events were noted, suggesting that AC mycelia deserve its
      consideration as a candidate for safe alternative treatment to conventional
      anti-hypertensive medications.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This the first report undertaken to assess the effect of supplementation with oral
      gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), adenosine and antrosterol-containing AC mycelia on blood
      pressure among people with mild hypertension. Forty-one subjects with systolic blood
      pressure (SBP) between 130 and 179 mm Hg and/or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) between 85
      and 109 mm Hg were randomized to receive either AC mycelia or starch placebo for 8 weeks,
      and had follow-up observation for an additional 2 weeks. SBP in the subjects given GABA,
      adenosine and antrosterol-rich AC mycelia significantly decreased compared to those who
      received the placebo (p<0.05). DBP also decreased after the intake of AC mycelia. Compared
      to the placebo, AC mycelia significantly reduced plasma renin activity by a maximum of 25 %
      and 36 % on week 8. This suppression suggested that AC mycelia is a potent inhibitor of
      renin, and its bioavailability is sufficient to produce BP reduction after a short term of
      oral administration. Neither adverse events nor abnormal laboratory findings were noted
      throughout the study period, suggesting that GABA, adenosine and antrosterol-rich AC mycelia
      significantly decreased borderline hypertension, which may support its consideration as a
      safe alternative treatment compared to conventional anti-hypertensive medications.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Eligible subjects were untreated hypertensive men or women aged between 20 and 80
             years old with SBP between 130 and 179 mmHg and/or DBP between 85 and 109 mmHg as
             measured in a sitting position

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Subjects were excluded if they had a history of major cardiovascular disease, severe
             liver dysfunction, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus or stroke. They were also
             excluded if they routinely consumed alcohol, were pregnant or unable to comprehend
             study instructions.
