TITLE:
      A Placebo-Controlled, Phase I Clinical Trial to Evaluate the Safety and Immunogenicity of Recombinant Envelope Proteins of HIV-1 gp160 and gp120 in Children >= 1 Month Old With Asymptomatic HIV Infection
SUMMARY:
      To determine the safety and immunogenicity of gp160 (MicroGeneSys), rgp120/HIV-1MN
      (Genentech), and rgp120/HIV-1SF2 (BIOCINE) and their adjuvants in HIV-infected children 1
      month to 18 years of age.

      The initiation of this immunotherapy trial will provide multiple benefits by assessing in
      asymptomatic HIV-infected children a therapy currently being tested in their adult
      counterparts, in the hope of forestalling the progression of HIV immunosuppression and
      clinical disease.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The initiation of this immunotherapy trial will provide multiple benefits by assessing in
      asymptomatic HIV-infected children a therapy currently being tested in their adult
      counterparts, in the hope of forestalling the progression of HIV immunosuppression and
      clinical disease.

      Patients are randomized to receive one of three vaccines (9 patients/vaccine) or the
      adjuvant placebos (3 patients/vaccine). The vaccines will be studied at both low and high
      doses. When three of four patients at the low dose of a vaccine have received two
      immunizations without evidence of dose-limiting toxicity, dose escalation to the higher dose
      of that vaccine is initiated in subsequent patient cohorts, provided all low dose arms are
      filled. A total of six immunizations are given, at 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, and 24 weeks. Patients
      are followed for 24 weeks after the last immunization.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication: Recommended:

          -  PCP prophylaxis.

        Patients must have:

          -  Documented asymptomatic HIV infection.

          -  CD4+ count as follows:

          -  1-11 months of age must have > 2000 cells/mm3 and >= 30 percent of the total
             lymphocytes; 12-23 months must have > 1000 cells/mm3 and >= 20 percent of the total
             lymphocytes; 24 months-6 years must have > 750 cells/mm3 and >= 20 percent of the
             total lymphocytes; and 7 years and older must have > 500 cells/mm3 and >= 20 percent
             of the total lymphocytes.

        NOTE:

          -  Patients who received zidovudine for 3 consecutive months immediately prior to study
             entry may receive only high doses of vaccine.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following condition are excluded:

          -  Any serious acute infection.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Anticipated steroid therapy of > 6 weeks duration.

        Excluded within the past 2 years:

          -  More than one serious proven bacterial infection such as sepsis, pneumonia,
             meningitis, bone or joint infection, abscess of an internal organ or body cavity
             (other than otitis media or superficial skin or mucosal abscesses) caused by
             Haemophilus, Streptococcus, Pneumococcus, or other pyogenic bacteria.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Antiretroviral therapy or immunomodulators (e.g., IVIG) within 1 month prior to study
             entry (NOTE: AZT is allowed within 1 month prior to study entry if patient is
             entering a high-dose arm).

          -  Uninterrupted steroid therapy of > 6 weeks duration.
