TITLE:
      Estrogen Replacement and Atherosclerosis (ERA) in Older Women
SUMMARY:
      To determine if estrogen replacement therapy, with or without low dose progesterone, slows
      progression or induces regression of coronary atherosclerosis in postmenopausal women.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death in postmenopausal women.
      Postmenopausal estrogen replacement is associated with a lower incidence of cardiovascular
      disease in women, especially in those with established coronary artery disease. The strength
      of the apparent effect of estrogen in epidemiologic studies suggests that estrogen plays a
      fundamental role in the maintenance of vascular health. Animal data suggest that the current
      practice of adding the low dose progesterone to prevent endometrial hyperplasia may inhibit
      the beneficial effects of estrogen on coronary arteries. Before committing millions of
      postmenopausal women to long-term estrogen use for prevention of coronary artery disease, it
      is mandatory to demonstrate that it does indeed protect against coronary atherosclerosis, to
      determine the impact of co-treatment with progestin, and to understand the mechanisms
      through which estrogen may exert it's cardioprotective effects.

      The Office of Research on Women's Health provided $500,000 in Fiscal Year 1995 for
      recruitment of subjects.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, placebo-controlled, blinded. The minimum diameter of coronary stenotic lesions
      was measured by angiography before and after three years in a group receiving unopposed
      estrogen replacement therapy, a group receiving estrogen replacement plus continuous low
      dose progestin, and a group receiving placebo. The incidence of clinical events was
      documented in all three groups. Secondary objectives of the trial included examining the
      effect of chronic and acute estrogen administration on endothelium-dependent coronary
      vasodilator capacity, plasma lipids and lipoproteins, antioxidant activity, blood pressure,
      glucose metabolism, and plasma hemostatic factors, as well as on behaviors, physical
      attributes, and psychosocial parameters. There were four pre-randomization variables in
      order to pre-stratify. These included current smoking status, insulin dependent diabetes,
      current lipid-lowering therapy, and the hospital where angiograms were performed.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Postmenopausal women with established coronary atherosclerosis.
