TITLE:
      Intravenous Streptokinase in Acute Myocardial Infarction
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether the administration of intravenous streptokinase (SK) early in the
      course of acute, transmural myocardial infarction would limit myocardial damage.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Determination of the potential value of thrombolytic therapy in patients with acute
      myocardial infarction was an issue of major importance in 1983. An estimated 1.4 million
      heart attacks occurred each year, of which over 500,000 were fatal. Reduction of mortality
      required an effective means to reduce infarct size. Studies indicated that reperfusion
      represented a potent means of achieving salvage of ischemic myocardium. Pilot clinical
      studies indicated that reperfusion could be achieved in a substantial percentage of patients
      by lysis of coronary thrombosis with both intracoronary and intravenous streptokinase
      administration. Intracoronary thrombolysis was receiving widespread clinical applications
      but had many limitations. The intracoronary route took 90-120 minutes longer to administer
      than the intravenous route. Because intracoronary therapy required the availability of a
      catheterization laboratories and highly skilled invasive cardiologists, this treatment was
      not available to large numbers of patients who were hospitalized in smaller community
      hospitals.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized design with two groups and fixed sample size. Control patients received routine
      coronary care. The treatment group received intravenous streptokinase plus conventional
      care. This was followed with intravenous heparin and warfarin. The primary endpoint was 14
      day mortality. Secondary endpoints included angiographic patency of the involved coronary
      artery at 10 to 14 days, left ventricular function, segmental wall motion analysis, and
      myocardial infarction size at 30-45 days.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, aged less than 75. Myocardial infarction onset within six hours.
