TITLE:
      Stenting Versus Best Medical Treatment of Asymptomatic High Grade Carotid Artery Stenosis
SUMMARY:
      Background. Carotid artery stenting (CAS) recently has become an accepted method for
      treatment of patients with high-grade carotid artery stenosis, who are at an increased risk
      for surgical carotid endarterectomy (CEA). The reported rates of neurological complications
      of CAS substantially decreased during the past years, and the routine use of cerebral
      protection devices and low profile catheter systems have further increased the procedure´s
      safety. In the early 90's large surgical trials in North America and Europe (NASCET, ECST
      and ACAS) demonstrated superiority of CEA compared to best medical treatment for symptomatic
      and asymptomatic patients. Provided that the ongoing randomized controlled trials comparing
      CAS and CEA confirm equivalence between the these methods, CAS similar to CEA is applicable
      to symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with high grade carotid stenosis. However,
      particularly in asymptomatic patients, the indication for revascularisation remains
      debatable. Protected CAS is associated with a very low rate of neurological complications,
      which are below the AHA recommendation for treating asymptomatic patients (3%). However, the
      introduction of new vascular protective medications like statins and clopidogrel during the
      recent years substantially improved the spectrum of best medical treatment, and the findings
      of NASCET, ECST and ACAS with respect to best medical treatment may therefore not be
      applicable any more.

      Study hypothesis and aims. Given the low frequency of spontaneous neurological
      complications, the preferable therapeutic approach to patients with asymptomatic high grade
      ( > 80%) carotid artery stenoses is currently unknown. Modern best medical treatment may
      manage to stabilize the atherosclerotic plaque, while CAS has the potential of resolving the
      carotid stenosis. Comparative data, however, are not available as yet. We hypothesized that
      protected CAS has a beneficial effect on occurrence of ipsilateral neurological
      complications and major adverse cardiac events in high-risk patients with asymptomatic > 80%
      internal carotid artery stenosis. Therefore, the aim of the present randomized controlled
      trial was to analyze neurological and cardiovascular outcome of patients treated with
      elective CAS plus best medical treatment compared to best medical treatment only.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Carotid artery stenting (CAS) recently has become an accepted method for treatment of
      patients with high-grade carotid artery stenosis, who are at an increased risk for surgical
      carotid endarterectomy (CEA). The reported rates of neurological complications of CAS
      substantially decreased during the past years, and the routine use of cerebral protection
      devices and low profile catheter systems have further increased the procedure´s safety. In
      the early 90ies large surgical trials in North America and Europe (NASCET, ECST and ACAS)
      demonstrated superiority of CEA compared to best medical treatment for symptomatic and
      asymptomatic patients. Provided that the ongoing randomized controlled trials comparing CAS
      and CEA confirm equivalence between the these methods, CAS similar to CEA is applicable to
      symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with high grade carotid stenosis. However,
      particularly in asymptomatic patients, the indication for revascularisation remains
      debatable. Protected CAS is associated with a very low rate of neurological complications,
      which are below the AHA recommendation for treating asymptomatic patients (3%). However, the
      introduction of new vascular protective medications like statins and clopidogrel during the
      recent years substantially improved the spectrum of best medical treatment, and the findings
      of NASCET, ECST and ACAS with respect to best medical treatment may therefore not be
      applicable any more.

      Given the low frequency of spontaneous neurological complications, the preferable
      therapeutic approach to patients with asymptomatic high grade ( > 80%) carotid artery
      stenoses is currently unknown. Modern best medical treatment may manage to stabilize the
      atherosclerotic plaque, while CAS has the potential of resolving the carotid stenosis.
      Comparative data, however, are not available as yet. We hypothesized that protected CAS has
      a beneficial effect on occurrence of ipsilateral neurological complications and major
      adverse cardiac events in high-risk patients with asymptomatic > 80% internal carotid artery
      stenosis. Therefore, the aim of the present randomized controlled trial was to analyze
      neurological and cardiovascular outcome of patients treated with elective CAS plus best
      medical treatment compared to best medical treatment only.

      SYNOPSIS

      BACKGROUND:

      The preferable treatment - whether revascularization or conservative - of asymptomatic
      high-risk patients with > 80% internal carotid artery stenosis (NASCET criteria) is
      currently unknown.

      STUDY HYPOTHESIS:

      We hypothesized that protected carotid artery stenting (CAS) plus best medical treatment is
      associated with reduced rates of ipsilateral neurological complications and major adverse
      cardiac events in high-risk patients with asymptomatic > 80% internal carotid artery
      stenosis compared to best medical treatment only.

      STUDY DESIGN:

      The study is designed as a randomized controlled trial with 1:1 random assignment between
      two treatment modalities including 300 patients within an scheduled inclusion period of 18
      months. The primary and secondary study endpoints are evaluated for an initial two year
      follow-up period after randomization. Secondary follow-up will be performed for 1, 1.5, 3, 5
      and 10 years post randomization.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Atherosclerosis is the underlying disease

          -  Patients with an asymptomatic stenosis >80% (NASCET) with a documented progression of
             the degree of stenosis to >80% within 6 months with a very tight stenosis ≥90% at
             initial presentation with a >80% stenosis plus silent ipsilateral ischemia documented
             by CCT or MRI with ipsilateral >80% stenosis plus contralateral >80% stenosis or
             occlusion with >80% stenosis plus planned major surgery

          -  Neurologist´s explicit consent to potentially perform CAS

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Inability to provide informed consent

          -  Underlying disease other than atherosclerosis (inflammatory or autoimmune disease)

          -  Traumatic or spontaneous carotid dissections

          -  Life expectancy <6 months

          -  Advanced dementia

          -  Advanced renal failure (serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dL)

          -  Unstable severe cardiovascular comorbidities (e.g. unstable angina, heart failure)

          -  Restenosis after prior CAS or CEA

          -  Allergy or contraindications to study medications (clopidogrel, statins, ASA)
