TITLE:
      Study on the Efficacy of Speed-Feedback Therapy for Elderly People With Dementia
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to verify the efficacy of speed-feedback therapy in improving
      the cognitive function of elderly people with dementia by a randomized controlled trial, and
      to demonstrate how that affects ADL and QOL.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Dementia is a syndrome caused by diseases of the cerebral parenchyma, and it is a state in
      which cognitive functions, including attention, memory, thinking, comprehension, judgment,
      and computation, are diminished. Because of the mental symptoms, problem behaviors, and
      decreased activities of daily living (ADL) it is also recognized as a major social problem.
      However, rehabilitation of elderly people with dementia is still at the trial-and-error
      stage, and establishing a method of rehabilitation is an urgent task. In 2004, the authors
      devised and created a training method that integrates exercise therapy with feedback therapy
      to treat the cognitive dysfunction of elderly people with dementia. To do so the authors
      introduced speed-feedback therapy with a bicycle ergometer as a feedback therapy
      intervention. The results of a preliminary study of the efficacy of this method in improving
      cognitive dysfunction in 17 elderly persons with dementia showed improvement in cognitive
      dysfunction, and their attentiveness also improved, suggesting that the impaired
      attentiveness may have improved in response to treatment by this method and, as a result,
      have led to improvement of cognitive dysfunction. However, it became clear that it would be
      necessary to further improve and develop the system, and to demonstrate its efficacy in a
      controlled trial and verify associations between improvement of cognitive dysfunction and
      improvement of the ADL of dementia patients and their quality of life (QOL).
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. 65 years of age or older

          2. Diagnosed with dementia by a physician

          3. Mini-Mental State Examination score of 23 points or less

          4. Capable of participating at least once a week for 6 weeks in succession

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Management of a medical risk required

          2. Impaired ability to pedal the ergometer because of an orthopedic or surgical disease
             of the lower extremities or central nerve paralysis

          3. Never having been on a bicycle, and incapable of pedaling well
