TITLE:
      Neuromuscular Balance in Low Back Pain
SUMMARY:
      The research was an interventional study with a quantitative board, fulfilled in a private
      clinique specialized in trauma service; it was formed between august to October of 2006. The
      objective was to investigate the effectiveness of neuromuscular balance in lumbar pain. The
      12 patients, with age between 20 and 55 years, whose did five consultations, with 100%
      presence, got relief of the pain and increase of movement of hips' articulation which was
      the most painful movement with 91,66% graduation. All the patients presented the shorting
      test positive and it kept positive in 7 patients. There was a significant improvement in
      pain relief (p=0,001,) comparing the first and the fifth consultation, and hip articulation
      movement. Even after the relief of the pain, 7(58,3%) of the patients kept the treatment for
      a more effective rehabilitation and prevention of repetition of the symptoms. It was
      concluded that the neuromuscular balance relieved quickly the pain, being essential for
      effective rehabilitation of low back pain, with the inclusion of others manual techniques.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The low back pain is a symptom presented in muscle-skeletal change on lumbar region,
      preferring young adults, in economic active fase. The neuromuscular balance was developed by
      Soulier when he met the "activator methods" which was a pen that create vibrations and
      consist in a vibration or a micro thrust to reduce the articulation and spinal problems
      through a non manipulative correction. The research was un interventional study with a
      quantitative board, fulfilled in a private clinique specialized in trauma service; it was
      formed between august to October of 2006. The objective was to investigate the effectiveness
      of neuromuscular balance in lumbar pain. The 12 patients, with age between 20 and 55 years,
      whose did five consultations, with 100% presence, got relief of the pain and increase of
      movement of hips' articulation which was the most painful movement with 91,66% graduation.
      All the patients presented the shorting test positive and it kept positive in 7 patients.
      There was a significant improvement in pain relief (p=0,001,) comparing the first and the
      fifth consultation, and hip articulation movement. Even after the relief of the pain,
      7(58,3%) of the patients kept the treatment for a more effective rehabilitation and
      prevention of repetition of the symptoms. It was concluded that the neuromuscular balance
      relieved quickly the pain, being essential for effective rehabilitation of low back pain,
      with the inclusion of others manual techniques.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with low back pain between 20 and 55 years old, submitted to a physical
             therapy treatment.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with no miofascial low back pain
