TITLE:
      A Phase I Open-Label Study of the Safety, Tolerance, and Pharmacokinetic Interactions of Combination Didanosine and Ribavirin in HIV-Positive Individuals
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the safety and tolerance of concurrent administration of standard-dose
      didanosine (ddI) with low-dose ribavirin in HIV-positive patients. To determine the
      pharmacokinetic interactions of concurrent administration of ddI and ribavirin and correlate
      pharmacokinetic parameters with toxicity. To investigate antiviral activity of the combined
      regimen.

      Combination ddI/ribavirin therapy, if safe and effective, offers an alternative combination
      antiretroviral regimen for patients unable to tolerate regimens containing zidovudine (AZT).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Combination ddI/ribavirin therapy, if safe and effective, offers an alternative combination
      antiretroviral regimen for patients unable to tolerate regimens containing zidovudine (AZT).

      Patients receive ddI alone for 4 weeks, followed by 8 weeks of combination ddI/ribavirin.
      Patients who complete the first 12 weeks without major toxicity may receive an additional 12
      weeks of combination therapy on an optional basis. Patients are followed for 60 days after
      the last treatment visit.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Stable maintenance or prophylaxis therapy for opportunistic infection, if such
             therapy was administered for at least 30 days prior to study entry.

          -  Isoniazid for chemoprophylaxis against Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

          -  Fluconazole for mucosal candidiasis or cryptococcosis.

          -  Acyclovir (up to 1.0 g/day).

          -  Dapsone.

          -  Ketoconazole.

          -  Quinolones.

          -  Tetracycline.

          -  Vitamins and herbal therapies.

          -  Antibiotics as clinically indicated.

          -  Systemic corticosteroids for < 21 days for acute problems.

          -  Regularly prescribed medications.

        Patients must have:

          -  HIV positivity by ELISA confirmed by Western blot.

          -  CD4 count < 500 cells/mm3 within 30 days prior to study entry.

          -  No active opportunistic infections requiring treatment (patients on stable
             maintenance and prophylaxis therapy for opportunistic infections for at least 30 days
             are permitted).

        NOTE:

          -  Enrollment of women is encouraged.

        Prior Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Prior stable maintenance or prophylaxis therapy for opportunistic infection, if
             administered for at least 30 days prior to study entry.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Concurrent rifampin or rifabutin.

          -  Other anti-HIV drugs and investigational agents.

          -  Biological response modifiers.

          -  Ganciclovir or foscarnet.

          -  Systemic cytotoxic chemotherapy.

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Concurrent radiation therapy other than limited localized therapy to the skin.

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  History of peripheral neuropathy.

          -  History of pancreatitis or active liver disease.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Prior ddI.

          -  Ribavirin within 60 days prior to study entry.

          -  AZT or ddC within 2 weeks prior to study entry.

        Prior Treatment:

        Excluded:

          -  Transfusion within 2 weeks prior to study entry.

        Active alcohol abuse.
