TITLE:
      Glycine and D-Cycloserine in Schizophrenia
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to compare the effects of D-cycloserine and glycine for
      treating negative symptoms (such as loss of interest, loss of energy, loss of warmth, and
      loss of humor) which occur between phases of positive symptoms (marked by hallucinations,
      delusions, and thought confusions) in schizophrenics.

      Clozapine is currently the most effective treatment for negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
      Two other drugs, D-cycloserine and glycine, are being investigated as new treatments.
      D-cycloserine improves negative symptoms when added to some drugs, but may worsen these
      symptoms when given with clozapine. Glycine also improves negative symptoms and may still be
      able to improve these symptoms when given with clozapine. This study gives either
      D-cycloserine or glycine (or an inactive placebo) with clozapine to determine which is the
      best combination.

      Patients will be assigned to 1 of 3 groups. Group 1 will receive D-cycloserine plus
      clozapine. Group 2 will receive glycine plus clozapine. Group 3 will receive an inactive
      placebo plus clozapine. Patients will receive these medications for 8 weeks. Negative
      symptoms of schizophrenia will be monitored through the Scale for the Assessment of Negative
      Symptoms, Positive symptoms will be monitored through the Positive and Negative Syndrome
      Scale, and additionally subjects will complete the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale and the
      Global Assessment Scale.

      An individual may be eligible for this study if he/she is 18 to 65 years old and has been
      diagnosed with schizophrenia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      To determine if glycine produces improvement in negative symptoms and D-cycloserine produces
      worsening in symptoms compared to placebo, patients will undergo a double blind study of
      d-cycloserine and glycine treatment added to clozapine.

      Clozapine is more effective for negative symptoms of schizophrenia than conventional
      neuroleptics, but the neurochemical actions contributing to this superior clinical efficacy
      remain unclear. Recent evidence points to a role for glutamatergic dysregulation in
      schizophrenia, as well as important differences between conventional agents and clozapine in
      effects upon glutamatergic systems. D-cycloserine, a partial agonist at the glycine
      modulatory site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, improves negative symptoms when
      added to conventional agents and worsens negative symptoms when added to clozapine.
      High-dose glycine also improves negative symptoms and has provided preliminary evidence
      suggesting that glycine improves negative symptoms when added to clozapine. Serum
      concentrations of glycine predicted response to both high-dose glycine and D-cycloserine.
      Both clozapine and D-cycloserine may improve negative symptoms by activation of the glycine
      modulatory site of the NMDA receptor complex. Because D-cycloserine is a partial agonist, it
      may act as an antagonist at the glycine site in the presence of clozapine, whereas the full
      agonist, glycine, would not be expected to worsen negative symptoms in the presence of
      clozapine.

      This study proposes to administer a fixed-dose of D-cycloserine, glycine, or placebo added
      to clozapine in 45 patients with schizophrenia. Because assessments are standardized between
      studies, results from this study can be compared with results from a previous study of
      D-cycloserine added to conventional neuroleptic.

      The study was ultimately suspended before participants were enrolled, due to definitive
      findings indicating that pairing treatment of D-cycloserine with Clozapine resulted in
      worsening of negative symptoms.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Diagnosis of Schizophrenia

          -  Score of 27 or greater on the Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS)

          -  Treatment with stable dose of clozapine for at least 4 weeks

          -  Between 18 and 65 years old

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  No other antipsychotic medications in oral for for at least 3 months or in depot form
             for 6 months

          -  Current major depressive episode

          -  Current substance abuse diagnosis
