TITLE:
      Investigation of the Biomarker Copeptin in Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction
SUMMARY:
      While troponin is not detectable until several hours after an Acute Myocardial Infarction
      (AMI), copeptin is expected to be elevated very early after an AMI. A combination of both
      markers for the diagnosis of AMI early after the event is therefore expected to be
      advantageous.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      In patients with symptoms suggestive of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) such as chest pain or
      pressure, shortness of breath, diaphoresis, and nausea, detection of a rise and/or fall of
      troponin with at least one value above the 99th percentile of the upper reference limit is
      essential to the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However, current troponin
      testing has limitations, including antibody specificity, assay imprecision, lack of
      standardization and a relatively late increase in the circulating troponin level after the
      onset of ischemia. Studies have shown a low diagnostic sensitivity of troponins when
      measured early (<6 hours) after symptom onset. Although there are some more sensitive
      troponin assays with a coefficient of variation (CV)10% at the 99th percentile of a normal
      reference population, most troponin assays have an imprecision CV of around 20% at the 99th
      percentile of the reference population. The early insensitivity of troponin results in an
      unmet need in the clinical evaluation of patients presenting with suspected ACS and AMI.

      Copeptin may improve early AMI diagnostic sensitivity because of a number of unique
      characteristics.

        -  Copeptin levels are elevated at presentation in patients with AMI compared to patients
           with other presentations.

        -  Copeptin levels are elevated in patients with AMI even when troponin levels were not
           elevated at the time of initial presentation.

        -  Thus, a combination of troponin and copeptin levels at presentation may result in a
           more accurate diagnosis of acute AMI than troponin alone.

        -  Copeptin levels drop 1 day after an AMI.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  The subject must be 18 years of age or older.

          -  The subject must present to the Emergency Department with symptoms consistent with
             acute coronary syndromes (e.g., chest discomfort/pain, squeezing/fullness in the
             chest, pain radiating to left or both arms, jaw pain, pain in the back/neck/stomach,
             shortness of breath, cold sweat, nausea/vomiting, lightheadedness).

          -  The subject must present to the Emergency Department within 6 hours of the onset of
             the most recent symptoms that prompted the subject to seek medical attention in the
             Emergency Department.

          -  The patient agrees to abide by all aspects of the protocol, including all telephone
             follow-up.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  The patient is unable to provide consent or understand the consent form.

          -  The ACS symptoms are clearly not the result of ACS (i.e., penetrating wounds, crush
             injury, etc.)
