TITLE:
      Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary Prevention Trial (CPPT)
SUMMARY:
      To determine whether reduction of cholesterol by drug therapy significantly lowered the
      atherosclerotic coronary heart disease rate in a group of hypercholesterolemic but otherwise
      healthy men.

      Total dollars spent on the CPPT from June 1973 were $142,250,000. We do not have a
      year-by-year breakdown.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Numerous prospective epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia is a
      major risk factor for atherosclerotic coronary heart disease. Research on animals indicating
      that the reduction of serum cholesterol prevented or reversed atherosclerosis had not been
      shown convincingly in humans. The Coronary Primary Prevention Trial tested the hypothesis
      that lowering the serum cholesterol in patients who had no existing evidence of coronary
      heart disease would reduce the subsequent rate of coronary heart disease in those persons.

      Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death and a major cause of morbidity in the
      United States. The very slow development of the underlying arterial disease and its
      frequently sudden onset and quickly fatal course necessitate a preventive approach if
      substantial inroads are to be made. The positive result from the Coronary Primary Prevention
      Trial (CPPT) has done much to resolve the controversy regarding the benefits of
      lipid-lowering, and should lead to firm advice for high-risk hypercholesterolemic subjects
      and for the population as a whole.

      The CPPT was part of the Institute's Lipid Research Clinic Program under the Lipid
      Metabolism Branch, DHVD, NHLBI. Twelve lipid research clinics in the United States and
      Canada participated in this trial, as well as a coordinating center, a central
      electrocardiographic laboratory, central lipid and clinical chemistry laboratories, a
      nutrition coding center, and a group of consultants on recruitment and adherence. This
      program's objectives included the development of standardized methods and definitions for
      the diagnosis of hyperlipoproteinemia and the performance of a series of collaborative
      studies of the prevalence and natural history of this disorder, as well as the design and
      implementation of the Coronary Primary Prevention Trial.

      The protocol for the trial was approved in November 1972. Beginning in July 1973, men with
      hypercholesterolemia were recruited as potential trial subjects from such diverse sources as
      physician referrals, blood bank donor lists, and mass screening programs. Each subject was
      screened further in a series of four visits, the purpose of which was to select only men (1)
      whose lipid abnormality was of the primary Type II phenotype, (2) who were free of
      clinically manifest coronary heart disease, and (3) whose excellent overall health and
      reliability made 7-10 years of follow-up a realistic objective. Additionally, a standardized
      limited-cholesterol/saturated fat diet was initiated at the second of these visits in order
      to exclude men whose cholesterol levels were highly responsive to diet. Subjects who met all
      the selection criteria were randomly assigned, in a double-blind fashion, to receive either
      the cholesterol-lowering drug cholestyramine or a placebo at their fifth visit.

      Recruitment of the 3,806 CPPT subjects was completed in July 1976. After randomization into
      the study, each subject visited his clinic at bimonthly intervals. At these visits,
      adherence to drug and diet were assessed, the study medication was supplied, general health
      and potential toxic side effects were monitored, and intervening cardiovascular events were
      recorded. Counseling in drug and dietary adherence were given at each visit, and medical
      advice was given when a problem was identified. Trial data were collected and analyzed at
      the Central Patient Registry and reviewed periodically by a Safety and Data Monitoring
      Board. Intervention ceased between May and August 1983. A five-year follow-up was initiated
      in November 1984 to detect possible toxicity in the CPPT participants following ingestion of
      cholestyramine (or placebo) for 7 to 10 years. Follow-up was completed in October 1989.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind, fixed sample size with one experimental group and one control
      group of equal size. Experimental group on diet and lipid-lowering drug regimen; control
      group on diet and placebo regimen.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men, ages 35-59. Type II hyperlipoproteinemia. Free from coronary heart disease.
