TITLE:
      Impact of Impaired Cerebral Autoregulation on Postoperative Delirium in Elderly Patients Undergoing Spine Surgery
SUMMARY:
      Delirium (confusion) after surgery is common and associated with a longer hospitl stay and
      increased hopsital cost. There is very little information available about how often delirium
      occurs and the complications associated with it. Elderly patients are at high risk for
      delirium after surgery. This research is being done to measure how often delirium after
      spine surgery occurs and to see if there are ways to predict if delirium will develop. The
      results from this study will provide important information on a possible mechanism and
      predictor of delirium.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Delirium (confusion) after surgery is common and associated with a longer hospitl stay and
      increased hopsital cost. This research is being done to measure how often delirium after
      spine surgery occurs and to see if there are ways to predict if delirium will develop. We
      hypothesize that impaired cerebral autoregulation may be a possible mechanism for
      postoperative delirium. We will measure intraoperative cerebral autoregulation and assess
      the relationship with postoperative dleirium. The results from this study will provide
      important information on a possible mechanism and predictor of delirium.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. ≥ 70 years old,

          2. Undergoing any lumbar spine surgery, posterior cervical spine surgery, or anterior
             cervical spine surgery > 2 levels

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. MMSE < 15

          2. Delirium at baseline

          3. Inability to speak and understand English

          4. Severe hearing impairment, resulting in inability to converse.

          5. Planned use of intraoperative ketamine

          6. Planned use of intraoperative remifentanil, except for airway management
             pre-incision.

          7. Arterial catheter not planned to be inserted
