TITLE:
      Delirium Recall in Advanced Cancer Patients
SUMMARY:
      Primary Objectives:

        1. To determine the proportion of patients who experience partial or complete recollection
           of symptoms of delirium and the level of distress associated with this recall.

        2. To determine caregiver's level of distress associated with the patient's episode of
           delirium.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Informed Consent for Patients:

      Delirium is often seen in patients with advanced cancer. Delirium is defined as confusion
      and restlessness. In this study, cancer patients will be asked about their memory of
      experiencing delirium and the distress related to those memories. Caregivers of those
      patients will also be asked to participate, and they will be asked questions about their
      experience during these situations.

      You will be tested using the Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale to see if you have recovered
      from your delirium. If you are still eligible to take part in this study, and both you and
      your caregiver agree to participate in this study; you will be asked by the research nurse
      to complete several questionnaires that ask questions about your mental state, any memory of
      experiencing delirium, the severity of the delirium, symptoms you experienced during the
      delirium episode, and your level of emotional distress related to that event. If you and
      your caregiver are asked to participate in this study; you will also be asked "open-ended"
      questions (questions with no wrong answers) regarding the experience you had during the
      severe episode of delirium; your memories of the experience, and the overall distress
      related to it. This conversation will be tape recorded, and it will be written down
      word-for-word, for the purpose of analysis. The conversation is expected to last no more
      than 30 minutes.

      The assessments and questionnaires will be conducted only at the time of interview. No
      further assessments or questions will be done after the completion of the study. All
      information collected for the study will be kept confidential. You will be assigned a study
      participant number when you enroll on the study, and this number will be used (instead of
      your name) on all data collections, to protect your confidentiality.

      This is an investigational study. Up to 100 patients and 100 caregivers will take part in
      this study. All will be enrolled at M. D. Anderson.

      Informed Consent for Caregivers:

      Delirium is often seen in patients with advanced cancer. Delirium is defined as confusion
      and restlessness.

      In this study, you will be asked about your memory of your family member's experience of
      delirium, and the distress related to those memories. The patient you are caring for will
      also be asked to participate, and they will be asked questions about their experience during
      these situations.

      If you are eligible to take part in this study, and both you and your family member agree to
      participate in this study, you will be asked by the research nurse to complete several
      questionnaires that ask questions about your family member's mental state, your memory of
      your family member's experience of delirium, the severity of the delirium, symptoms your
      family member experienced during the delirium episode, and your level of emotional distress
      related to that event. If you and your caregiver are asked to participate in this study; you
      will also be asked "open-ended" questions (questions with no wrong answers) regarding the
      experience you had during your family member's severe episode of delirium, your memories of
      the experience, and the overall distress related to it. This conversation will be recorded
      using a tape recorder, and it will be written down word for word, for the purpose of
      analysis. The conversation is expected to last no more than 30 minutes.

      The assessments and questionnaires will be conducted only at the time of interview. No
      further assessments or questions will be done after the completion of the study. All
      information collected for the study will be kept confidential. You will be assigned a study
      participant number when you enroll on the study, and this number will be used (instead of
      your name) on all data collections, to protect your confidentiality.

      This is an investigational study. Up to 100 cancer patients and 100 caregivers will take
      part in this study. All will be enrolled at M. D. Anderson.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Presence of advanced cancer, defined as local recurrent and/or metastatic.

          2. History of an episode of delirium during the patient's current inpatient admission,
             diagnosis of delirium will be made by one of the palliative care specialists
             according to DSM-IV-TR criteria.

          3. If the patient has a complete recovery from the episode of delirium, the patient must
             be approached within 3 days for the possibility of inclusion in study. "Complete
             recovery" will be defined as diagnosis of complete resolution of all symptoms of
             delirium according to DSM-IV-TR criteria by one of the palliative care specialists.

          4. Ability to communicate in the English language.

          5. Caregiver who is 18 years of age or older (assessments used in this study have not
             been validated in pediatric population), is able to communicate in English and
             comprehend the assessment questionnaire, and is at the bedside for a significant
             length of time (approximately 4 hours) each day during the delirium episode. Both the
             patient and their caregiver must agree to participate for inclusion in the study.

          6. Written informed consent signed by the patients and the participating caregivers.

          7. MDAS [Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale] < 13 (Scores of 13 or above likely reflect
             the presence of delirium).

          8. Patients will be recruited from the palliative care mobile team or the inpatient
             palliative care unit.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Refusal of both the patient and their caregiver to complete assessments

          2. Inability to complete assessment due to sensorial deficits other than cognition; e.g.
             blindness, deafness, aphasia, etc., that might impact the patient's ability to recall
             the episode of delirium.
