TITLE:
      Prevention of Early Readmission in Elderly Congestive Heart Failure Patients
SUMMARY:
      To assess the impact of a multidisciplinary treatment program on three-month
      readmission-free survival in elderly congestive heart failure patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The prevalence of congestive heart failure increases progressively with advancing age, and
      congestive heart failure is a major cause of mortality, morbidity, and diminished quality of
      life in the elderly. Not only is congestive heart failure the most common cardiovascular
      indication for hospitalization in patients 65 years or older, but frequent repetitive
      hospitalizations, occurring in 30-50 percent of patients within three to six months of
      initial discharge, create an imposing cost burden in caring for these patients. A pilot
      study conducted at the grantee institution has shown that elderly congestive heart failure
      patients at risk for early readmission can be identified at the time of initial
      hospitalization, that up to 50 percent of readmissions are potentially preventable, and that
      a non-pharmacologic treatment strategy consisting of patient education, medication analysis,
      discharge planning, and enhanced follow-up is feasible and may reduce readmissions by 30 to
      50 percent.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      In the feasibility study, patients were randomly assigned to receive intervention or
      standard care over a four year period. Patients were stratified into readmission risk
      categories of high or moderate based on the presence of four independent risk factors for
      readmission defined in a prior study at Jewish Hospital in St. Louis. The risk factors
      included: four or more prior hospitalizations within the preceding five-year interval,
      previous history of congestive heart failure, hypocholesterolemia, and right bundle-branch
      block on the admitting electrocardiogram. The study intervention consisted of individualized
      patient education using teaching materials specifically designed for the study; a careful
      review of medications with specific recommendations designed to eliminate unnecessary drugs,
      decrease the number of dosing intervals, improve compliance, and minimize side effects;
      early discharge planning; and enhanced post-discharge follow-up. The primary endpoints were
      rehospitalization within 90 days after initial hospital discharge and the cumulative number
      of days hospitalized during follow-up. Principal secondary endpoints included analyses of
      the effect of the study intervention on compliance with prescribed medications, dietary
      sodium intake, incidence of adverse drug reactions, patient knowledge and understanding of
      congestive heart failure, patient-assessed quality of life, and the overall cost of medical
      care.

      In the full-scale trial, 140 patients were assigned to the control group which received all
      standard treatments and services ordered by their physicians. A total of 142 patients were
      assigned to the treatment group which received intensive education about congestive heart
      failure and its treatment by an experienced cardiovascular research nurse, using a teaching
      booklet developed by study investigators for geriatric patients with heart failure.
      Treatment group patients also received individualized dietary assessment and instruction
      given by a registered dietitian; consultation with social-service personnel to facilitate
      discharge planning and care after discharge; an analysis of medications by a geriatric
      cardiologist who made specific recommendations to eliminate unnecessary medications and
      simplify the overall regimen; and intensive follow-up after discharge. The goals of
      follow-up were to reinforce the patient's education, ensure compliance with medications and
      diet, and identify recurrent symptoms amenable to treatment on an outpatient basis. The
      primary outcome measure was survival for 90 days without hospital readmission. Secondary
      endpoints included the number of readmissions for any cause, the number of readmissions for
      congestive heart failure, the cumulative number of days of hospitalization during follow-up,
      quality-of-life scores, and the overall cost of medical care.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 70 or older, with documented congestive heart failure.
