TITLE:
      Genetic Mapping for Cardiac Risk Assessment
SUMMARY:
      The main objective of the GENOCOR project (Genetic mapping for cardiac risk assessment) is
      the setting up of a joint public/private laboratory (GENOCOR-LAB) dedicated to the
      development and testing of new cost-effective technologies exploiting the growing knowledge
      in the genomic correlates of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) and of their evolution; the data
      obtained by the GENOCOR-Lab should especially orient secondary prevention and specific
      treatment of ischemic heart diseases (IHD).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The Laboratory will be based in the premises of the CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, a
      research institution operating as CVD Research Hospital System, with two Hospital Units (CNR
      Campus in Pisa and G. Pasquinucci Hospital in Massa).

      The project is based on the cooperation of a national private company (DiaSorin, endowed
      with promising proprietary technologies in the novel diagnostic biotechnologies) and three
      research units (at clinical and molecular biology level) two from the National Research
      Council (IFC-CNR, Pisa and ITB-CNR, Milano, both very active in advanced biological
      research) and one from the University Vita-Salute San Raffaele (UHSR, Milano, operating a
      top range hospital and center for advanced biological research): GENOCOR Lab becomes then
      the first product of the cooperation within the CNR MERIT Network (MEdical Reseach in ITaly)
      currently being set-up by CNR.

      The project is based on the availability of proprietary large scale databases of selected
      clinical populations that will be probed with the novel genomic and post-genomic
      technologies. High throughput SNPs technologies and post-genomic expression and proteomic
      analyses will be used to assess profiles of genetic variability identifying subjects with a
      distinct proneness to ischemic heart disease (IHD), hard cardiovascular events and
      unfavourable outcomes. Specific focusing will be made possible by the availability, within
      the proposed research network, of well established clinical data bases and biological sample
      collections, enabling the retrospective and prospective access to large and well
      characterised populations of patients with IHD. Cardiovascular phenotypes will include
      patients with acute coronary syndromes (unstable angina and acute myocardial infarction) and
      patients with chronic ischemic heart disease and prolonged follow-up; with this approach, it
      will be possible to cover both short-term and long-term evolution by detailed clinical,
      biohumoral and instrumental phenotyping at the time of acute events and with a systematic
      follow-up.

      This approach should allow to overcome the major limitations and unbalance of previous
      studies, either focussed to small well characterized populations in which few genetic
      variations have been explored, or extended to large populations with a wider gene
      variability approach but inadequate information on phenotype and evolution disease.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients affected by history of IHD with a non-fatal evolution(angina or AMI as first
             manifestation),age at the onset of the disease (<50 o >60 years.

          -  Patients with acute coronary syndrome as first manifestation of coronary disease,
             admitted to the coronary unit within 6 hours from the onset of symptoms.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Age>75

          -  Pregnancy

          -  Recent(< 6 months) cerebral ischemic attack

          -  Active cancer

          -  Inability to provide an informed consent.
