TITLE:
      Clinical Trial of Eye Prophylaxis in the Newborn
SUMMARY:
      To compare the effectiveness of silver nitrate drops, erythromycin ointment, or no
      medication in preventing neonatal conjunctivitis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and other
      eye infections.

      To compare side effects of the two prophylactic agents.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Sexually transmitted diseases are a major cause of neonatal eye infections. All 50 States
      require some eye treatment at birth to prevent gonorrheal eye infections. Approximately 3 to
      4 million Americans acquire a genital chlamydial infection each year, and more than 150,000
      infants are born to mothers with chlamydial infections. These infants are at high risk of
      developing conjunctivitis and pneumonia.

      In the State of Washington, one of three treatments is presently required by law to help
      prevent gonorrheal eye infection in newborn babies: 1 percent silver nitrate drops,
      erythromycin ointment, or tetracycline ointment. Although all three treatments appear to
      prevent eye infections from gonorrhea, silver nitrate and erythromycin may also partially
      prevent chlamydial conjunctivitis. However, silver nitrate may irritate and damage the eyes
      of newborns.

      If it is not known whether the mother is infected, it may be better not to give the drugs
      routinely. It could not be clearly established from the medical literature whether the risk
      to infants from no treatment was higher or lower than the risk from receiving a prophylactic
      agent. Many parents at low risk for gonorrhea prefer that no prophylaxis be given to their
      newborns. Moreover, Great Britain, which used no eye prophylactic agents for newborns for
      the 25 years preceding the study, has rates of neonatal conjunctivitis similar to those in
      the United States. For these reasons, the Washington State Board of Health granted this
      study an exemption from the State law to allow the investigators to evaluate scientifically
      the risks and benefits of no treatment.

      The study was a randomized, double-masked clinical trials planned to include 1,200 infants
      born over 3 years. The trial compared the efficacy of two treatment regimens (silver nitrate
      and erythromycin) in two treatment groups to the outcomes in a control group receiving no
      prophylaxis. (Erythromycin was chosen over tetracycline as the antibiotic in this study
      because it is more commonly used in the United States for ocular prophylaxis.)

      Women were recruited from the University of Washington Medical Center-associated obstetric
      units. Among the 2,577 women eligible for possible participation, 758 enrolled. Of these
      participants, 89 were not randomized. Among the 669 randomized women, 39 were not available
      for personal observation. These 39 were equally distributed among the three prophylaxis
      groups. In the final participant group, the infants of 630 women were evaluable.

      The infants were randomly assigned to one of these three groups in the delivery room.
      Infants without conjunctivitis were monitored for 2 months after delivery. Infants who
      developed conjunctivitis were monitored for 2 months after successful treatment of their
      infection. The study included extensive efforts to determine the etiology of the
      conjunctivitis and to find nasolacrimal duct obstruction.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      The study included male and female infants delivered at University Hospital in Seattle,
        Washington. Women were recruited after the 28th week of pregnancy and had to be
        English-speaking. In addition, they planned to stay at the hospital at least 48 hours
        following delivery and lived in the greater Seattle metropolitan area. Infants were
        eligible whether they were delivered vaginally or by cesarean section. Excluded from the
        study were siblings of infants enrolled in the study, women who were culture-positive for
        gonorrhea, infants receiving systemic antimicrobials for reasons other than
        conjunctivitis, women receiving antimicrobials at the time of delivery, and families
        unlikely to be available for followup after delivery.
