TITLE:
      Drug Therapy for Alcohol Detoxification
SUMMARY:
      This project will provide relevant clinical information for primary care practitioners
      treating alcohol withdrawal syndrome in outpatient settings. This double-blind, placebo-
      controlled clinical trial will compare the effectiveness of lorazepam (Ativan) and
      carbamazepine (Tegretol) in alcoholics who meet the criteria for a diagnosis of
      uncomplicated alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Participants are randomized to five days of
      treatment with a 1-week posttreatment followup.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for alcohol dependence and uncomplicated alcohol withdrawal syndrome.

          -  Ability to provide informed consent, complete self-rating questionnaires, and respond
             to structured clinician-rated instruments.

          -  Must live within 50 miles or one hour of the study site and have reliable
             transportation to the site.

          -  Must have a significant other who will provide a collateral report, attend outpatient
             visits, and be available by telephone.

          -  Subjects must be medically stable.

          -  Must have a clinical withdrawal assessment prior to study.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for any other substance dependence syndrome other than alcohol
             dependence or marijuana abuse.

          -  Use of other illicit psychoactive substances (except marijuana) in the last 7 days.

          -  Use of pharmaceutical agents within the last 14 days that are known to lower the
             seizure threshold, augment or decrease the alcohol withdrawal syndrome.

          -  History of status epilepticus or two or more seizures occurring within 24- hour
             period during a previous alcohol withdrawal or other forms of epilepsy.

          -  Current major depressive illness, dementia, suicidal or homicidal ideation, or past
             or present schizophrenia.

          -  Acute medical instability as characterized by hepatic encephalopathy, past or present
             severe liver failure.

          -  Diabetes requiring insulin, or severe renal disease.

          -  Pregnant females.

          -  High blood pressure.

          -  Individuals with vomiting who cannot take oral medications at beginning of study or
             whose vomiting can be controlled only with antiemetic medication.

          -  High white blood count, or liver function test that is 3 times higher than normal.

          -  Known hypersensitivity or previous adverse reaction to carbamazepine, lorazepam, or
             other benzodiazepines.

          -  Any relevant ECG abnormality which might require hospitalization or greatly interfere
             with safety during outpatient withdrawal.

          -  History of severe gastrointestinal (GI) disease which might render absorption of the
             medication difficult or produce medical instability of the patient during
             detoxification which would include active peptic ulcer disease, ulcerative colitis,
             regional ileitis, or evidence by history or physical examination of GI bleeding.

          -  Familial tremor or other neurological condition, determined by history, known to
             produce tremor.

          -  Unable to provide a written informed consent.
