TITLE:
      Activity Counseling Trial (ACT)
SUMMARY:
      To develop and evaluate the effectiveness of various intervention approaches, delivered in
      primary health-care settings, in increasing and maintaining habitual physical activity and
      cardiorespiratory fitness among sedentary men and women patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      A conference on physical activity sponsored by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
      (NHLBI) in August 1991 recommended that one priority area for research should be the
      development and evaluation of interventions for adoption and maintenance of physical
      activity including interventions that can be incorporated into primary care practice. The
      1992 NHLBI Working Group Report on Primary Prevention of Hypertension identified physical
      inactivity as a risk factor for hypertension. Intervention research applicable to
      health-care settings is particularly important in light of national recommendations advising
      health-care professionals to intervene, including Healthy People 2000, the U.S. Preventive
      Services Task Force reports, and the American Heart Association.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, multicenter, demonstration and education study. Men and women primary care
      patients at three sites in Dallas, Palo Alto, and Memphis were randomized to two patient
      education intervention groups or to a standard care control group of physician advice.
      Intervention continued for two years for all participants. The primary outcomes were
      cardiorespiratory fitness and physical activity. Other outcomes were effects on blood
      pressure, lipoproteins, and weight; the long-term maintenance of these effects; and the
      cost-effectiveness of various intervention approaches. Recruitment took 15 months and has
      been completed with the accrual of 874 subjects.

      The National Institute on Aging participated in the ACT through the addition of a
      measurement of arterial stiffness involving approximately 700 patients. The NIA tested the
      hypothesis that increases in physical activity resulting from educational interventions
      could reduce arterial stiffness.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Sedentary men and women, free of coronary heart disease, who were patients in primary care
        settings.
