TITLE:
      Potassium and Sodium to Control Blood Pressure in Hypertensives
SUMMARY:
      To examine the role of dietary sodium reduction with and without potassium supplementation
      in controlling blood pressure in hypertensive men.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Appropriately increased interest and concern about high blood pressure as a major public
      health problem coincided with the indication that the risks of hypertension-related
      morbidity and mortality could be reduced by reduction of blood pressure. Consensus
      suggestions that individualized approaches be used in treating patients with mild
      hypertension stimulated further investigations of non-pharmacological methods. Such
      investigations were also of considerable interest in relation to understanding the
      physiology of blood pressure control as well as the development of less costly non-drug
      therapies. Interest was heightened by information suggesting that there might be distinctly
      harmful side effects related to antihypertensive drug therapy, particularly thiazide
      diuretics, in some settings. Studies of non-drug therapies included dietary modifications
      primarily involving weight reduction and sodium restriction with increasing recent concern
      about other factors such as alcohol intake, dietary fat, calcium, magnesium, and potassium
      intake.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, double-blind. One hundred forty-five subjects were randomized into a low sodium
      placebo group in which sodium intake was restricted to no more than 80 mEq/day, 142 subjects
      into a potassium supplementation (96 mEq/day) group whose sodium intake was also restricted
      to no more than 80 mEq/day. After 12 weeks of intervention, antihypertensive drugs were
      withdrawn. Follow-up of each participant was for at least two years. The primary endpoint
      was the proportion of subjects requiring antihypertensive medication at various points
      following randomization.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men, ages 45 to 68. Subjects were hypertensive, were treated for at least 3.5 years with
        antihypertensive drugs and whose diastolic blood pressure was less than 90 mm Hg.
