TITLE:
      Study to Explore the Onset of Efficacy on Magnetic Resonance Disease Activity of BG00012 (Dimethyl Fumarate) in Patients With Relapsing remitTing Multiple Sclerosis
SUMMARY:
      This is a phase IV, interventional, multicenter, randomized, double blind,
      placebo-controlled, 24 week study to assess the MRI onset of efficacy of BG00012 240 mg BID
      in newly diagnosed naïve-to-treatmentRRMS patients.

      The study will enroll 150 patients in 20 centers in Italy. Patients will be randomized in a
      2:1 ratio to receive either BG00012 240 mg BID or placebo for 24weeks.

      The primary objective of the study is to assess the early efficacy of treatment with BG00012
      240 mg BID in the brain of newly diagnosed and naive-to-treatment patients with RRMS.

      Secondarily, the time course of this beneficial effect will be assessed and the safety of
      BG00012 will be evaluated.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BG00012, a new oral formulation of dimethyl fumarate, has been recently approved by Food and
      Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) for the treatment of adult
      patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).

      Its mechanism of action appears to be mediated, at least in part, through activation of the
      nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-related factor 2 (Nrf2) antioxidant response pathway, a
      critical cellular defense mechanism for mitigating oxidative, inflammatory, and xenobiotic
      stress.

      Inflammation in relapsing MS is indicated by the infiltration of immune cells into the CNS
      and consequent damage to the blood-brain barrier that can be visualized on
      gadolinium-enhanced MRI.

      BG00012 has shown to produce a significant beneficial effect on clinical as well as MRI
      efficacy parameters in RRMS in two pivotal Phase III trials, namely DEFINE and CONFIRM. In
      particular, BG00012 has shown to significantly reduce the proportion of patients with
      relapse, the ARR, disability progression (DEFINE) and the mean number of Gd+, T2- and
      T1-weighted MRI lesions compared to placebo after two years treatment.

      Additionally to clinical effects as well as on conventional MRI scans, that are very
      sensitive to focal white matter pathology in MS, BG00012 has shown to determine significant
      improvements in Magnetization Transfer Ratio (MTR) in both whole brain and normal appearing
      brain tissue (NABT) at 24 weeks and 2 years compared to baseline in DEFINE study. In DEFINE
      study, MTR analysis of Gd+ lesions has also been performed, however, due to the intense
      suppression of Gd+ lesion activity of BG00012 treatment, data from only 7 patients in the
      active arm compared to 29 in the placebo group were available and differences were not
      observed between treatment arms. Changes in MTR of the brain have been shown in animal
      models to be sensitive to changes in myelin content; MTR decreases with acute demyelination
      and increases with myelination. MTR can be used to detect changes in myelin density in NABT
      as well as in focal lesions of patients with MS, thus representing a new valuable tool for
      assessing the effects of disease-modifying therapies in MS.

      Additionally, results of post-hoc analyses of pooled data from DEFINE and CONFIRM studies
      show that BG00012 240 mg BID has a major effect on the subgroup of naïve-to-treatment and
      newly diagnosed patients, who were randomized within one year (median time) from the MS
      diagnosis. In this subgroup, the ARR, the number of Gd+, T2- and T1-weighted MRI lesions was
      reduced by 56%, 92%, 80% and 68%, respectively, in the BG00012 group compared to placebo.
      The mechanism of action of BG00012 and the relevant clinical efficacy on inflammatory
      conventional MRI parameters, mainly Gd+ lesions, provide support for a further investigation
      of BG00012 in newly diagnosed and naïve-to-treatment RRMS patients. Furthermore, no
      information regarding the MRI onset of efficacy of BG00012 treatment in this group of
      patients is currently available neither data on improvement of MTR changes in whole brain,
      NABT and Gd+ lesions that treatment with BG00012 can provide. Furthermore, no data regarding
      the effect of Tecfidera on the accumulation of brain cortical lesions are available.

      The primary goal of this study is to assess the MRI short-term onset of efficacy of BG00012
      in newly diagnosed and naïve-to-treatment patients with RRMS. For this purpose, a
      conventional MRI efficacy primary endpoint will be evaluated.

      Exploratory objectives of the study are to assess MTR changes of whole brain, NABT and Gd+
      lesions at 24 weeks, mean number of cortical lesionsand brain volume changes in newly
      diagnosed and naïve-to-treatment patients after 24 week treatment with BG00012 compared to
      placebo. As recently demonstrated, a higher cortical lesion load has been clearly associated
      with a higher rate of progression in disability, as measured by the EDSS, and cortical
      lesion volume was found to be an independent predictor of future cognitive status.

      This is a phase IV, interventional, multicenter, randomized, double blind,
      placebo-controlled, 24 week study to assess the MRI onset of efficacy of BG00012 240 mg BID
      in newly diagnosed naïve-to-treatmentRRMS patients.

      The study will enroll 150 patients in 20 centers in Italy. Patients will be randomized in a
      2:1 ratio to receive either BG00012 240 mg BID or placebo for 24 weeks. The study period
      will consist of screening,24-week treatment and 4-week follow-up.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        To be eligible to participate in this study, candidates must meet all the following
        eligibility criteria atthe Screening visit (V0)AND at baseline (V1):

          -  Ability to understand the purpose and risks of the study and provide signed and dated
             informed consent and authorization to use protected information in accordance with
             local subject privacy regulations.

          -  Patients with RRMS (McDonald criteria, 2010) who do not accept current injectable
             firstline DMTs.

          -  Age between 18 and 50 years at the time of informed consent.

          -  MS onset within one year before enrolment

          -  ≥ 1 Gd+ lesions at a brain MRI scan performed within three months beforeenrolment.

          -  No previous disease modifying and/or immunosuppressive treatments for MS.

          -  Must have a baseline EDSS between 0.0 and 5.0, inclusive. · Women of childbearing
             potential (i.e. who are not post-menopausal for at least 1 year) and men must
             practice effective contraception (as defined by the Investigator) during the study
             and be willing and able to continue contraception for 30 days after their last dose
             of study treatment.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        Candidates will be excluded from study entry if any of the following exclusion criteria
        exists at Screening OR Baseline/Randomization Visit:

          -  Primary progressive, secondary progressive, or progressive relapsing MS, as defined
             by Lublin and Reingold (Lublin and Reingold 1996)

          -  Previous disease modifying and/or immunosuppressive treatments for MS, including
             Tcell or T-cell receptor vaccination, any therapeutic monoclonal antibody,
             Mitoxantrone, Cyclophosphamide

          -  Previous treatment with Fumaderm®, dimethyl fumarate or other fumarates

          -  History of malignancy (except basal cell carcinoma that has been completely excised
             prior to study enrollment)

          -  History of severe allergic or anaphylactic reactions or known drug
             hypersensitivity.Known allergy/hypersensitivity to Gadolinium.

          -  History of abnormal laboratory results indicative of any significant endocrinologic,
             hematologic, hepatic, immunologic, metabolic, urologic, renal, and/or other major
             disease that in the opinion of the Investigator would preclude participation in a
             clinical trial.

          -  Uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to: ongoing or active
             infection; symptomatic congestive heart failure; unstable angina pectoris; cardiac
             arrhythmia; serious or acute liver, kidney, or bone marrow dysfunction; uncontrolled
             diabetes; serious or acute psychiatric illness that would limit compliance with study
             requirements.

          -  History of or positive test result at screening for human immunodeficiency virus
             (HIV).Positive for hepatitis C antibody and/or positive for hepatitis B surface
             antigen (HBsAg) at screening.

          -  History of drug or alcohol abuse (as defined by the Investigator) within the 2 years
             prior to inclusion.

          -  An MS relapse that has occurred within the 30 days prior to inclusion (screening)
             AND/OR the subject has not stabilized from a previous relapse prior to inclusion.
