TITLE:
      Robot Aided Rehabilitation - Multi-point Evaluations
SUMMARY:
      Sensorimotor impairments following stroke can lead to substantial disability involving the
      upper extremity. These impairments often involve complex pathological changes across
      multiple joints and multiple degrees-of-freedom (MJMD) of the arm and hand, thereby
      rendering them difficult to diagnose and to treat. Many potential mechanisms, such as
      weakness, motoneuronal hyperexcitability, and elevated passive impedance, can contribute to
      the impairment, thereby making it difficult to discern where best to focus treatment. The
      objectives of this study are to quantify the progression of neuromechanical properties
      throughout the upper extremity during recovery from stroke.

      The aim of this study is to examine neuromechanical properties throughout the entire upper
      extremity in stroke survivors over a period of 6 months and throughout the progression from
      the acute to the subacute to the chronic phases of recovery. The researchers hypothesize
      that excessive local and cross-coupled stiffness, heteronymous reflexes, and diminished
      individuation and proprioceptive acuity will be present among multiple DOFs in the upper
      limb. The stiffness and spasticity will increase with time post-stroke.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE Stoke is the leading cause of adult disability and the third
      leading cause of death (killing 160,000 Americans/year) in the United States; about 750,000
      first ever and recurrent strokes occur in the United States each year. The economic burden
      is huge, and stroke is estimated to cost the United Stated $62.7 billion in medical expenses
      and lost wages. Stroke is commonly associated with motor-related disabilities. Motor
      impairments in stroke survivors typically affect the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and fingers of
      the arm simultaneously. Patients may develop spastic hypertonia and reduced range of motion
      (ROM) at multiple joints. Several stereotypical patterns of arm impairments with multiple
      joints involved are commonly seen in patients with neurological impairments, including
      adducted/internally rotated shoulder, flexed elbow, pronated forearm, flexed wrist, and
      clenched fist. Furthermore, the impaired arm of a stroke survivor commonly develops abnormal
      coupling among multiple joints and among multiple DOFs (e.g. shoulder abduction, flexion,
      and rotation) at a given joint. Stroke survivors may lose independent movement of individual
      joints and appropriate coordination among joints. There is a strong need to treat
      stereotypical deformity, impairment of hypertonic arms and multiple involved joints
      simultaneously on a frequent basis to reduce spasticity/contracture and increase mobility in
      those who have had a stroke, which will be address in the proposed study.

      METHODS The aim of this study will be addressed through a longitudinal evaluation of stroke
      survivors over the first 6 months following their stroke. Specifically, upper extremity
      control and neuromechanical properties will be measured at 7 different time points over the
      six months.

      Selection of Subjects Twenty-four stroke survivors will be recruited over the 5 years of the
      study. All participants will be in the acute phase of recovery at time of enrollment from a
      first-ever focal unilateral lesion (ischemic or hemorrhagic) as diagnosed by MRI or CT.
      Participants will be recruited from the inpatient population at RIC and from referrals from
      Northwestern Memorial Hospital.

      Subjects will be asked to come to our labs at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago to be
      consented and participate in an initial screening. Designated study personnel will obtain
      consent and complete the screening visit. If qualified and enrolled, the subject will be
      asked to complete 7 evaluation sessions at times indicated in Outcome Measures Section.

      Subject participation will last for 6 months total. If the subject has persistent or severe
      pain, he/she will not continue until he/she feels sufficiently recovered enough and
      continued participation is deemed appropriate by a clinician.

      Evaluation and Measurement In an initial screening session, after the subject has been
      consented, a clinician will check the subject's health status and conduct clinical
      examinations in order to determine if the subject meets the inclusion and exclusion
      criteria. During the screening session the subject will participate in several clinical
      assessments. The screening evaluations will take about one half hour.

      If the subject qualifies for the study, they will participate in evaluation sessions at 7
      time points spaced throughout the study. For each evaluation session he/she will be asked to
      come to our laboratories on the 13th floor of the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago.
      Evaluation of subjects will have neuromechanical and clinical components; the
      neuromechanical components of the evaluation will take approximately two hours and the
      clinical components will also take approximately two hours.

      Neuromechanical evaluations The neuromechanical portion of the evaluation the subject will
      sit upright comfortably on a sturdy barber's chair, with the trunk trapped to the backrest.
      The arm, forearm and hand will be strapped to their corresponding braces with the relevant
      axes of the IntelliArm aligned with the arm at the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and fingers. The
      position of the elbow, wrist, and finger servomotors can be adjusted for different arm,
      forearm and hand lengths. The subject's arm will be moved at different speeds including one
      joint at a time and multiple joints simultaneously. Similarly, the subject will be asked to
      move his/her arm one joint at a time and multiple joints simultaneously. During the
      evaluation sessions, signal from the subject's muscles called electromyography (EMG) will be
      recorded to monitor activities of the subject's upper limb muscles. The skin over the muscle
      belly will be cleaned with an alcohol pad and may be shaved by disposable razors.
      Self-adhesive electrodes will be placed on the cleaned sites and connected to the instrument
      and computer. The electrodes are just used for recording the signal generated by the muscles
      and the subject will not feel any shocks during the evaluations. Non-invasive
      electroencephalography (EEG) electrodes may be attached on the scalp to record brain
      activity signals. A video or some photos may be taken as an option to evaluate the movement
      patterns during the evaluations.

      In diagnosing the multi-joint and multi-DOF biomechanics changes, the IntelliArm will
      operate both passive and active modes. In the passive mode, the multi-joint arm robot will
      move the shoulder, elbow, and wrist of the impaired arm of stroke survivors throughout the
      ROMs both simultaneously and individually in well-controlled patterns with multi-axis
      torques and positions measured at the should, elbow and wrist simultaneously. In the active
      mode, the patient will move the impaired arm voluntarily and the multi-joint and multi-DOF
      dynamic properties will be measured at the shoulder, elbow and wrist simultaneously.

      Measures of stiffness and of hyperexcitability of the long finger flexor muscles, namely
      spasticity and relaxation time, will be made using techniques we have implemented
      successfully in the past. Spasticity of finger muscles will be measured as the reflex
      response to imposed rotation of the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints of the four fingers. A
      servomotor will create either fast MCP rotation (300°/s) to invoke a stretch reflex or slow
      constant-velocity rotation (10°/s) to measure nominally passive stiffness. Wrist orientation
      will be fixed with a fiberglass cast which is subsequently clamped to a table to prevent arm
      translation. MCP angle, angular velocity, and torque are recorded for analysis of
      spasticity. EMG recordings will be obtained with surface electrodes (Bagnoli, Delsys, Inc.,
      Boston, MA) from selected superficial muscles such as extensor digitorum communis (EDC) and
      flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS). Relaxation time will be quantified by examining FDS
      activity. The subject will be instructed to maximally grip a dynamometer upon hearing an
      audible tone. The subject should then relax his grip as quickly as possible after hearing a
      second tone. The relaxation time is defined as elapsed time from the second tone to the
      point at which the FDS magnitude returns to the baseline level + three standard deviations.

      Clinical evaluations During clinical evaluations subjects will undergo a battery of
      standardized clinical assessments. These assessments require subjects to complete functional
      movements and tasks using their arms and hands.

      Potential additional evaluations Additionally, subjects may be asked to wear a small motion
      tracker (datalogger) for up to 6 hours. This will record the subject's arm movements in
      his/her own living environment, thereby providing a measure of real-world activity, taking
      personal and environmental factors into consideration. The datalogger consists of motion
      sensors, that attach to the subject's arm via straps, and a small recorder that can clip on
      to the belt. The subject will take the datalogger home. After wearing it for the time
      described above, the subject will take the datalogger off (as instructed during the
      evaluation session in our lab) and return it at the next training session.

      As an option, changes in corticospinal activation may be evaluated using transcranial
      magnetic stimulation (TMS) in some subjects, provided the subjects meets
      inclusionary/exclusionary criteria, such as no implanted cardiac pacemaker or metal implants
      in the head/face. TMS is used to evaluate corticomotor excitability. It is delivered via
      Magstim BiStim stimulator (Magstim Co, Dyfed, UK) that will be used to deliver stimuli via a
      figure-of-eight coil (70mm windings). Responses will be examined in bilateral muscles using
      surface electrodes. While stimulating over the affected (or unaffected) hemisphere, motor
      evoked potentials (MEPs) are recorded over the muscles contralateral to the affected (or
      unaffected) hemisphere. The participants are seated comfortably during the evaluation. Foam
      earplugs are inserted into the patient's external ear canals to attenuate the stimulator
      discharge sound. Surface electromyography electrodes are placed over the muscles bilaterally
      for recording TMS MEP responses.

      Protection Against Risk:

      A number of safeguards have been implemented. Mechanical/electrical stops will be used to
      restrict the motion of the robots to safe ranges. Velocity limits will also be set to
      restrict the speed of the movement. Joint angle, velocity, and force will be monitored
      continuously to ensure they fall within the appropriate range. Exceeding the thresholds will
      result in motor shut-down. Additionally, the motors can be turned off at any time using an
      accessible on/off switch to protect from discomfort or potential injuries. The IntelliArm
      and the hand jig have previously been used safely with a number of stroke survivors. Rest
      breaks will be provided as needed during therapy to prevent excessive muscle soreness and
      fatigue.

      A cast saw will be used to remove the fiberglass cast used in evaluations. Improper use of
      the saw could produce a burn. Project staff has been trained in the operation of the saw and
      proper procedures to follow. Adhesive used to secure the surface electrode could irritate
      the skin. The skin will be carefully prepared before applying the electrode and then cleaned
      when the electrode is removed.

      Specific to TMS, although rare instances of seizure have been reported when long trains of
      high frequency excitatory TMS were applied, these events have not been reported when
      recommended guidelines have been followed. The parameters proposed in this study are well
      within these published safety guidelines, and individuals who've suffered stroke are one of
      the most commonly requited populations for TMS studies. Providing they have never had a
      seizure and do not meet any of the other exclusion criteria listed above, they are a
      clinical population to which TMS can be safely applied.

      Data Analysis:

      To relate and find the relationship between physiological data and functional performance,
      the data will be evaluated using a) biomechanics data analysis, b) correlation and principle
      component analysis, c) regression, d) Rasch analysis, and e) structural equation modeling.
      Physiological data obtained from the IntelliArm (e.g. abnormal coupling between the
      joints/DOFs, passive workspace and active workspace, multiple joint DOF/stiffness) will be
      analyzed to describe and characterize the arm impairment. Similar measures will be obtained
      for the fingers to characterize hand impairment. We will especially examine how these
      measures change over time. Curves will be fit to the data to approximate functions
      describing the changes in neuromechanical measurements over time. Similarly, the scores from
      the clinical evaluations (WMFT, ARAT, CAHAI, FMUE) will be assessed over the time course of
      the recovery period.

      The potential relationships among the physiological data and the clinical data are of
      special interest. To determine the proper physiological measurements in stroke progression
      and to relate them to functional performances, correlation analysis and principal component
      analysis will be conducted as initial steps to find which physiological variables have high
      correlations with functional measures and cluster together as similar indicators. Those
      potential indicators will be filtered through data reduction procedures and then used in a
      multiple regression analysis to predict functional outcomes at the activity level (assessed
      by WMFT, ARAT, and CAHAI) and participation level (assessed by the datalogger) with adjusted
      person information and environmental factors serving as categorical variables. Rasch
      analysis will be used to evaluation the item difficulty hierarchy and item fit to link the
      subject's functional ability level with specific functional tasks. This will help to find
      the clinical potential thresholds/cut-off points if there is a consistent pattern between
      the physiological data and functional measures. Furthermore, an ICF model will be evaluated
      using structural equation modeling, which can test a set of regression equations
      simultaneously and exam the relationship among the impairment ability, participation
      variables with the personal and environmental factors taken into consideration.

      Data Collection and Record Keeping:

      Designated study personnel will enter de-identified data into a password protected computer.
      Paper records of any kind collected during evaluation and treatment sessions will be stored
      in a locked cabinet. Data will be kept for 3 years after the end of the study and then
      destroyed by a secure document destruction service.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  • First focal unilateral lesion, ischemic or hemorrhagic

               -  Had a stroke less than a month prior to enrollment

               -  Rated between stages 1-4 on the Chedoke McMaster Stroke Assessment Impairment
                  Inventory: Stage of Recovery of the Arm

               -  Rated between stages 1-4 on the Chedoke McMaster Stroke Assessment Impairment
                  Inventory: Stage of Recovery of the Hand

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  • Apraxia

               -  Subjects who have other unrelated or musculoskeletal injuries
