TITLE:
      A Phase II/III Double-Blind Study of Amitriptyline and Mexiletine for Painful Neuropathy in HIV Infection
SUMMARY:
      To assess the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of amitriptyline hydrochloride versus
      mexiletine hydrochloride in reducing pain intensity in patients with HIV-related painful
      peripheral neuropathy.

      No large-scale controlled clinical trials of symptomatic therapy for painful HIV-related
      neuropathy have been attempted. Both amitriptyline and mexiletine have been useful in the
      management of painful neuropathies; however, both are associated with certain toxicities. In
      this comparative study of amitriptyline and mexiletine, benztropine mesylate also will be
      included as an active placebo to mimic the side effects of the study drugs.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      No large-scale controlled clinical trials of symptomatic therapy for painful HIV-related
      neuropathy have been attempted. Both amitriptyline and mexiletine have been useful in the
      management of painful neuropathies; however, both are associated with certain toxicities. In
      this comparative study of amitriptyline and mexiletine, benztropine mesylate also will be
      included as an active placebo to mimic the side effects of the study drugs.

      Patients are randomized to receive amitriptyline, mexiletine, or benztropine mesylate as an
      active placebo to mimic the mild side effects associated with both amitriptyline and
      mexiletine. Doses are gradually increased over 4 weeks until a minimum effective dose or MTD
      is reached, then patients are treated for at least 4 additional weeks at the final dose
      before gradually tapering off. Neurologic exams are performed at screening and at the end of
      treatment. Intensity of pain is rated twice daily by the patient. Patients are followed at
      Weeks 2, 4, and 8, and at 10 days after completely tapering off of drug.

      PER 3/16/95 AMENDMENT: Patients with no pain relief 14 days after initiation of study
      therapy may have dose doubled or increased to maximum allowable dose, whichever is lower.
      Then if no improvement occurs within 14 days after dose increase, patients have the option
      of discontinuing study medication.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria

        Concurrent Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Aspirin and acetaminophen.

          -  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents.

          -  Opiates.

          -  Pyridoxine (only if accompanied by isoniazid).

          -  ddI, ddC, d4T, and 3TC if on a stable dose.

          -  AZT.

          -  Cimetidine if on a stable dose.

        NOTE:

          -  Per 3/16/95 amendment, Lactaid may be taken by lactose-intolerant patients for
             effects of lactose in placebo capsules.

        Concurrent Treatment:

        Allowed:

          -  Acupuncture.

        Patients must have:

          -  Documented HIV infection.

          -  Painful peripheral neuropathy.

        NOTE:

          -  Patients in ACTG blinded studies of dideoxynucleosides such as ddI, ddC, and d4T are
             encouraged to enroll in this study.

        Prior Medication:

        Allowed:

          -  Prior ddI, ddC, d4T, or 3TC, if on a stable dose for at least 8 weeks prior to study
             entry.

          -  Prior cimetidine if on a stable dose for at least 2 weeks prior to study entry.

        Exclusion Criteria

        Co-existing Condition:

        Patients with the following symptoms or conditions are excluded:

          -  Diabetes mellitus.

          -  Neurological disease of sufficient severity to confound the evaluation of peripheral
             neuropathy, such as myelopathy without neuropathy. (NOTE: Patients with both
             myelopathy AND painful peripheral neuropathy are eligible.)

          -  Electrocardiogram (EKG) indicating malignant arrhythmia or cardiac conduction
             disturbances (such as second or third degree AV block, anterior hemi-block, or
             prolonged QT interval).

          -  Suicidal thoughts of sufficient severity to require treatment with antidepressant
             medication.

        Concurrent Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Phenytoin or carbamazepine (unless on stable dose for 8 weeks prior to study entry).

          -  Capsaicin.

          -  Any MAO inhibitor antidepressants, any tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants,
             certain serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (fluoxetine, paroxetine, and venlafaxine), or
             mexiletine (except as dispensed for this study).

          -  Disopyramide.

          -  Procainamide.

          -  Quinidine.

          -  Tocainide.

          -  Flecainide acetate.

          -  Encainide.

          -  Lidocaine.

          -  Cisplatin.

          -  Vincristine.

          -  Chloramphenicol, disulfiram, ethionamide glutethimide, gold, hydralazine, iodoquinol,
             metronidazole, nitrofurantoin, or ribavirin (only in patients in whom the onset or
             clear worsening of painful peripheral neuropathy was attributed to previously taking
             these drugs).

          -  Any investigational drugs other than 3TC (except with permission of the protocol
             team).

          -  Terfenadine (if concurrent with ketoconazole).

        Patients with the following prior conditions are excluded:

          -  Documented history of cardiac disease.

          -  History of allergy to, or intolerance of, tricyclic antidepressants, mexiletine, or
             benztropine.

        Prior Medication:

        Excluded:

          -  Prior disopyramide.

          -  Prior procainamide.

          -  Prior quinidine.

          -  Prior tocainide.

          -  Prior flecainide acetate.

          -  Prior encainide.

          -  Prior lidocaine.

          -  Cisplatin or vincristine within 8 weeks prior to study entry.

          -  Chloramphenicol, disulfiram, ethionamide glutethimide, gold, hydralazine, iodoquinol,
             metronidazole, nitrofurantoin, or ribavirin within 8 weeks prior to study entry (only
             in patients in whom the onset or clear worsening of painful peripheral neuropathy was
             attributed to taking these drugs).

          -  Any MAO inhibitor antidepressants, any tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants,
             certain serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (fluoxetine, paroxetine, and venlafaxine), or
             mexiletine, within 4 weeks prior to study entry.

          -  More than 50 percent change in the weekly dosage of any pain control medications
             within 2 weeks prior to study entry.

        Per 3/16/95 amendment:

          -  ddI, ddC, d4T, or 3TC within 8 weeks prior to study entry ONLY IF dideoxynucleoside
             dosing was suspended or permanently discontinued.

        Risk Behavior:

        Excluded:

          -  Active drug or alcohol abuse.
