TITLE:
      Prevention of Arthritis-Related Work Disability
SUMMARY:
      People with rheumatic disorders (arthritis) often have trouble keeping their jobs. This
      study will look at whether vocational rehabilitation (VR) will improve the ability of
      employed people with arthritis to keep their jobs. Job retention VR services target key
      factors that increase the risk of job loss. They aim to modify jobs to reduce barriers
      caused by functional limitations and disease symptoms, future career planning, and establish
      a partnership with a VR counselor for ongoing help.

      We will conduct the study among patients with rheumatic disorders recruited in eastern
      Massachusetts. We will give 120 study participants job retention services provided by VR
      counselors. We will give another 120 participants literature about employment- related
      resources. We will compare the outcomes of the two groups to evaluate the usefulness of job
      retention services in preventing job loss in people with rheumatic disorders.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Job loss commonly occurs among people with rheumatic disorders. This study will determine
      whether vocational rehabilitation (VR) provided to employed people with rheumatic disorders
      will improve their ability to remain employed. VR is applied primarily to people who have
      already lost their jobs. However, using job retention VR services may prevent, or delay, the
      onset of employment work loss among people with rheumatic disorders. Job retention VR
      services target important employment-loss risk factors. They do so by modifying jobs to
      reduce barriers posed by functional limitations and symptoms, promoting future career
      planning, and establishing an alliance with a VR counselor for ongoing assistance.

      The study is a randomized, controlled trial conducted among patients with rheumatic
      disorders recruited from the practices of rheumatologists in eastern Massachusetts.

      We will randomly assign 120 study participants to receive job-retention services provided by
      VR counselors and 120 participants (controls) to receive literature about employment-related
      resources. We will assess intermediate outcome variables (self-efficacy, work limitations,
      and job accommodation-seeking behaviors) and the endpoint outcome variable, work instability
      (a measure that includes employment loss), immediately prior to the interventions and at
      6-month intervals over a 24-month period after the interventions are carried out. We will
      compare the outcomes of the two groups to evaluate the usefulness of job retention services
      in forestalling work instability in this population.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Must currently be employed full or part time

          -  Must live in selected communities in eastern Massachusetts

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Plans to move from area

          -  Plans to have joint replacement surgery in next 6 months

          -  Plans to retire or go on disability within next 2 years
