TITLE:
      Efficacy of Low (30ml) Versus Full Dose (100ml) Contrast CT Pulmonary Angiography in Detecting Emboli
SUMMARY:
      With the improvement in CT scanners and injectors, diagnostic chest CT can now be performed
      in less than 10 seconds. It was hypothesized that diagnostic CT pulmonary angiograms could
      be done with less than the usual 80-120 ml of contrast used. We have developed a method of
      performing diagnostic CT pulmonary angiograms with 30 ml of intravenous contrast in most
      patients. The long-term objective of this study is to show that there is no difference in
      the diagnostic efficacy of this low dose 30 ml technique when compared to the more
      traditional full-dose technique.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Potential participants in the study will have been referred to the radiology section for a
      CTPA for a suspected pulmonary embolus. The radiologist will review the patient's record in
      CPRS, as is done routinely in this situation. Patients with class 3 or 4 CHF,
      supraventricular tachycardia, Serum Creatinine >1.5 mg/dl (>1.3 mg/dl female), history of
      contrast allergy, or unable to give informed consent will be excluded from both arms of the
      study. Patients with serum creatinine >1.28 mg/dl require referring physician approval. If
      the participant appears to qualify for the study then the study physician will contact the
      referring physician and inform him/her of the study. If the referring physician is agreeable
      then either the radiologist or the referring physician will approach the patient, either at
      the bedside or in the radiology clinic to determine if the patient is interested in
      participating in the study. If so, a study radiologist will begin the informed consent
      process. After informed consent is obtained the subject will be computer randomized to
      either the new low-dose or full-dose technique protocols. A total of 220 studies (110 per
      group) will be performed.

      Multidetector CT Scan: All CT examinations will be performed on the Siemens Sensation
      64-MDCT scanner. Visipaque (Iodixanol) 320 non-ionic isoosmolar contrast agent will be used
      in all contrast examinations followed by a subsequent injection of normal saline. An
      informed written consent for the injection of IV contrast will be obtained prior to all CT
      examinations. Safe venous access will be obtained via either an antecubital vein or a
      central venous line. For low dose CT pulmonary angiograms, 30 ml of IV Radio Contrast
      Material (RCM) will be injected at a flow rate of 5 ml/second followed by an injection of 20
      ml of normal saline at 5ml/second. The region of interest (ROI) will be the superior vena
      cava (SVC) at the approximate level of the aortic arch. The scan will be triggered to begin
      at 75 Hounsfield units (HU). For Full dose CT pulmonary angiograms, 100 ml of IV RCM will be
      injected at a flow rate of 5ml/sec. The ROI will be the main pulmonary artery. The scan will
      be triggered at 120 HU. One mm contiguous axial spiral scans will be obtained from the apex
      of the lung through the adrenals. Reformatted 1.5 mm axial, 3 mm axial, 1.5 mm coronal and
      sagittal images will be obtained. All images will be uploaded to the AGFA Picture Archiving
      Communication System (PACS) workstation for interpretation. The costs of all CT scans and
      RCM will be covered by the Department of Imaging as the majority of the studies are part of
      routine clinical care.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients referred for CT pulmonary angiogram to exclude pulmonary embolus

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Class 3 or 4 Congestive Heart Failure

          -  Supraventricular tachycardia

          -  History of contrast allergy

          -  Unable to give informed consent

          -  Patients with serum creatinine >1.28 mg/dl without referring physician approval
