TITLE:
      Cooperative Study of Factor VIII Inhibitors
SUMMARY:
      To test the efficacy of prothrombin complex concentrates (Factor IX) in the treatment of
      hemophiliac patients who had inhibitors to Factor VIII.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Despite major advances in the treatment of patients with hemophilia, a serious remaining
      challenge was presented by the occurrence of circulating inhibitors to Factor VIII. Because
      of lack of information on the natural course of patients with Factor VIII inhibitors, the
      relative efficacy of various modes of therapy was not established. The Division of Blood
      Diseases and Resources decided to sponsor a clinical investigation which would evaluate
      populations of hemophilia patients for Factor VIII inhibitors, follow up these patients to
      provide information on the natural history of the inhibitor in the hemophilia patients, and
      make available a reference center to monitor results and attain uniformity.

      Treatment of a patient with a severe inhibitor and consequent bleeding remained a problem.
      Management included protracted treatment with Factor VIII, use of immunosuppressive agents
      and prothrombin complex (or Factor IX) concentrates. The rationale for Factor IX was that it
      bypassed the defect in Factor VIII caused by the inhibitor. This method of therapy attracted
      wide popularity, but the success was greatly debated. It was intended at the very outset of
      the Factor VIII study that therapeutic trials involving patients with inhibitors would not
      be a prime function, but that such studies would be monitored if necessary. A controlled
      trial of Factor IX concentrates therapy was strongly advised by the DBDR Advisory Committee.
      Accordingly, during fiscal year 1978, a protocol for a double-blind control study was
      developed by the Factor VIII inhibitor group. The trial began in the spring of 1978, and the
      intervention terminated about one year later.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Double-blind study; patients served as their own controls. A total of 51 patients each
      received a single large dose of Konyne, Proplex, or diluted albumin (as a control). Joint
      bleeding of the elbow, knee, and ankle was evaluated six hours after each dose.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Males with hemophilia, not stratified as to ethnic group.
