TITLE:
      Optimal Exercise Regimens for Persons at Increased Risk
SUMMARY:
      To assess exercise training adherence and compliance over two years in subjects who were at
      relatively high risk for coronary artery disease. Also, to test strategies for improving
      adherence and compliance and to assess the effect of exercise training.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Regular physical exercise is associated with lower coronary heart disease mortality,
      favorably affects coronary risk factors, and increases cardiovascular functional capacity.
      Fewer than one-third of Americans engage in regular physical exercise and only 20 percent of
      men and 10 percent of women over age 45 do so. This is largely because effective strategies
      for increasing the exercise habit in a broadly-based segment of Americans have not been
      developed. This study applied physiological and behavioral knowledge derived in numerous
      laboratories over the past 10-15 years to a clinical setting.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Following stratification by gender and cigarette smoking status, subjects were randomized to
      one of four groups: home exercise of moderate intensity which was individually monitored;
      home exercise of high intensity which was individually monitored; exercise of high intensity
      which was group supervised; and a no program control group. The intervention program was
      conducted for one year followed by a one-year maintenance program. Main outcome measures
      included treadmill exercise test performance, exercise participation rates, and heart
      disease risk factors. Variables measured over two years included plasma lipids,
      lipoproteins, apoproteins, lipase activity, glucose and insulin, sex hormones,
      cardiovascular reactivity to psychological stress, cigarette smoking, nutrient intake,
      psychological status, and cardiovascular functional capacity.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Sedentary men and women, ages 50 to 65. Women were postmenopausal and not taking hormone
        replacement therapy. All subjects were free from, but at increased risk for, coronary
        heart disease.
