TITLE:
      Naltrexone Treatment for Alcoholic Women
SUMMARY:
      This study will assess naltrexone's effectiveness in treating alcoholism in women and
      provide information on its potential value in treating eating disorders common among
      alcoholic women. Alcoholic women with and without both eating disorders and depression will
      be randomly assigned to placebo or naltrexone treatment. Each group will receive behavioral
      therapy for 12 weeks, with followup 6 months after treatment.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Background: Despite important gender differences in drinking patterns, physiological effects
      of alcohol, and co-occurring psychiatric conditions, relatively little is known about the
      efficacy of naltrexone for the treatment of alcohol dependence in women. This study
      investigated the safety and efficacy of naltrexone in combination with Cognitive Behavioral
      Coping Skills Therapy (CBCST) in a sample of alcohol-dependent women, some with comorbid
      eating pathology.

      Methods: One hundred three women meeting DSM-IV criteria for alcohol dependence (29 with
      comorbid eating disturbances) were randomized to receive either naltrexone or placebo for 12
      weeks in addition to weekly group CBCST.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for alcohol dependence. Abstinent from alcohol for a period of at
             least 5 days.

          -  Able to read English and complete study evaluations.

          -  A stable residence and a telephone to ensure that subjects can be located during the
             study.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Meets criteria for dependence on another psychoactive substance besides alcohol or
             nicotine.

          -  Regular use of psychoactive drugs except antidepressants.

          -  Current use of disulfiram (Antabuse).

          -  Psychotic or otherwise severely psychiatrically disabled.

          -  Significant underlying medical conditions such as cerebral, renal, thyroid, or
             cardiac pathology.

          -  Abstinent longer than 30 days prior to admission to program.

          -  Hepatocellular disease or elevated bilirubin levels.

          -  Individuals with present history of opiate abuse or who require the use of opioid
             analgesics.

          -  Women who are pregnant, nursing, or not using a reliable method of birth control.

          -  Women who are significantly overweight or significantly underweight.
