TITLE:
      Evaluation of Lung Doppler Signals in Pulmonary Hypertension
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to evaluate the lung Doppler signals in patients with pulmonary
      hypertension that undergo (prospective arm) or underwent (retrospective arm) right heart
      catheterization (RHC) in order to assess whether this non-invasive tool could be used in
      pulmonary hypertension diagnosis and monitoring.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      PROTOCOL SUMMARY

      Title: Evaluation of lung Doppler signals (LDS) in pulmonary hypertension (PHTN) Device:
      SONARA/tek transcranial Doppler (TCD) system Study Objectives: To evaluate the LDS in
      patients with PHTN that undergo (prospective arm) or underwent (retrospective arm) right
      heart catheterization (RHC) in order to assess whether these signals can be used in
      pulmonary hypertension diagnosis and monitoring.

      Study Design:

      Two study arms:

        1. Prospective arm to measure LDS during right heart catheterization in patients
           undergoing the procedure for evaluation of PHTN.

        2. Retrospective arm to measure LDS in patients in whom previous RHC confirmed the
           presence of PHTN.

      Recruitment target: Prospective arm: 50 patients during 18 months. Retrospective arm: 50
      patients during 18 months.

      Study Population:

        1. Patients suspected of PHTN by echocardiogram, who are scheduled to undergo RHC
           (prospective arm)

        2. Patients who underwent RHC in the past and were diagnosed with PHTN (retrospective arm)

      Study endpoint:

        1. Comparison of pulmonary blood pressures at rest, following vasodilator medication and
           following upper extremities exercise as measured by RHC and by the LDS during the
           Valsalva maneuver.

        2. Determining LDS characteristics of PHTN patients
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          1. Prospective arm:

               -  Man or woman aged over 18.

               -  With suspicion or diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension.

               -  Scheduled to undergo right heart catheterization

               -  Able and willing to give informed consent.

          2. Retrospective arm:

               -  Man or woman aged over 18.

               -  With diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension confirmed by right heart
                  catheterization in the past.

               -  Able and willing to give informed consent.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          1. Both arms:

               -  Minor (aged < 18).

               -  People unable or unwilling to give informed consent.

               -  Hemodynamically unstable patients.

               -  Pregnant women.

          2. Prospective arm only:

               -  Patients with contra-indication to right heart catheterization.

               -  Patients incapable of performing a Valsalva maneuver.

               -  Patients with recent myocardial infarction, high degree AV block, severe aortic
                  stenosis or glaucoma
