TITLE:
      National Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the long term efficacy, morbidity and mortality associated with medical therapy
      with lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) as compared to medical therapy alone and to define
      patient selection criteria. The trial, conducted in conjunction with a patient registry, is
      supported by the NHLBI, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), and the Agency
      for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      LVRS is intended primarily for those patients whose chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
      (COPD) is predominantly emphysema. Emphysema is characterized anatomically "by abnormal,
      persistent enlargement of the airspaces distal to the terminal bronchioles, accompanied by
      the destruction of the airspace walls and without obvious fibrosis". The loss of the lung
      architecture leads to compressible peripheral airways that close at higher than normal lung
      volumes (early airway closure). The increased compliance and the air trapping from early
      closure leads to hyperinflation of the lung, over distention of the chest wall, a flattened,
      disadvantaged diaphragm, and ventilation-perfusion mismatch. In the 1950s and 1960s, Dr.
      Otto Brantigan theorized that surgical excision of multiple wedges of lung would reduce lung
      volumes, thereby restoring the outward elastic pull on the small airways and reduce airway
      obstruction. Dr. Brantigan reported that the surgical excision of lung tissue resulted in
      significant clinical improvement in some cases, but mortality was high. With little
      objective data and high mortality, the procedure did not gain widespread acceptance.

      The experience that diaphragmatic and chest wall function could be restored in emphysema
      with lung transplantation renewed interest in Dr. Brantigan's work. Improvements in surgical
      technique have opened the possibility of performing surgical excisions of lung tissue.
      Recent reports on LVRS have shown improvements in FEV1, FVC, TLC, RV and dyspnea and quality
      of life assessments.

      These reports generated enormous excitement among patients and their doctors. Many centers
      around the country started performing LVRS with the result that hundreds of patients had the
      procedure, despite the preliminary nature of the results, the lack of rigorous patient
      selection criteria and the lack of information on long term outcome. Basic questions remain
      such as which patient should have the surgery, what protocol should be followed, what
      physiological tests should be obtained, and what is the long term efficacy of the technique
      on morbidity, mortality, and quality of life. The mechanisms of benefit and the full
      cardiopulmonary consequences are unknown.

      The concept for the trial originated in the NHLBI Workshop on Evaluation and Research in
      Lung Volume Reduction Surgery. The initiative was reviewed and approved at the May 1996
      National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council meeting. The Requests for Proposals were
      released in June, 1996.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      In the trial, 1218 eligible patients were randomized to receive either medical therapy (610)
      or medical therapy with LVRS(608). LVRS was performed by median sternotomy or video-assisted
      thorascopic surgery (VATS). Centers randomized their patients to either a) medical therapy
      alone versus medical therapy with LVRS by median sternotomy, b) medical therapy alone versus
      medical therapy with LVRS by VATS, or c) medical therapy alone versus medical therapy with
      LVRS by median sternotomy versus medical therapy with LVRS by bilateral VATS. Medical
      therapy included pulmonary rehabilitation and education. Direct comparisons of the two
      surgical techniques were possible only at the centers that performed both techniques. All
      arms included intensive pulmonary rehabilitation. The primary endpoints were survival and
      functional improvement as assessed by maximum workload. Secondary endpoints included
      morbidity, improvement in pulmonary function, quality of life and performance of activities
      of daily living. Follow-up exams, including history, physical exams, pulmonary function
      tests, exercise tests and quality of life assessments, occurred after pre-operative
      rehabilitation and six and twelve months after surgery and every twelve months thereafter.
      Recruitment ended July 31, 2002 and follow-up ended in December, 2002.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women with end-stage emphysema.
