TITLE:
      Role of Metabolites in Nicotine Dependence (2) - 5
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to determine the effects of varying doses of cotinine on
      cigarette self-administration.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Previous studies have shown that cotinine, a metabolite of nicotine, antagonizes some of the
      effects of nicotine. One study showed that nicotine eliminates some of the beneficial
      effects of the nicotine patch in reducing withdrawal symptoms. The purpose of this study was
      to examine the effects of cotinine. The results generally showed no effects on
      self-administration of cigarettes, although higher serum nicotine levels were observed on
      the highest doses of cotinine compared to placebo or lower doses of cotinine.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

        Male/Female subjects ages 21-45 yrs. inclusive, with a smoking history of at least 1 pack
        of cigarettes daily for at least 1 year. Subject must be in good health as verified by
        medical history, screening examination, and screening laboratory tests. Subject must
        provide written informed consent to participate in the study and be motivated to stop
        smoking for a short term.

        Exclusion Criteria:

        History of myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, sustained or episodic cardiac
        arrhythmias, symptomatic peripheral vascular disease, peptic ulcer disease or any other
        medical condition which the physician or investigator deems inappropriate for
        participation. Insulin-dependent diabetes. Pregnant or lactating, or not using adequate
        birth control methods. Requirement of any form of regular psychotropic medication
        (antidepressants, antipsychotics, or anxiolytics) and recent psychiatric history). Chronic
        use of systemic steroids or antihistamines. Skin sensitivity which would preclude use of a
        transdermal system. Abuse of alcohol or any other recreational or prescription drug. Use
        of any other tobacco products including smokeless tobacco and nicotine products. Previous
        use of transdermal nicotine system. Inability to fulfill all scheduled visits and
        examination procedures throughout the study period.
