TITLE:
      Combining N-of-1 Trials to Assess Fibromyalgia Treatments
SUMMARY:
      This study will compare the effectiveness of combination therapy with the drugs
      amitriptyline and fluoxetine (AM+FL) and amitriptyline (AM) alone in the treatment of people
      with fibromyalgia. Doctors will treat each study participant with both AM + FL and AM alone
      for 6 weeks at a time. The study uses a method that combines results from treatment of
      individual patients to assess overall treatment effectiveness and help individual patients
      and their physicians with their treatment decisions. This study will also help compare the
      results of community-based studies (studies involving private doctors) and studies based at
      clinical research centers.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      This study will use the combined N-of-1 method to compare the effectiveness of the
      combination therapy amitriptyline and fluoxetine (AM+FL) versus amitriptyline (AM) alone in
      patients with fibromyalgia (FM). It will also compare community-based and center-based trial
      results. We will ask community-based, board-certified rheumatologists to participate as
      investigators and we will also carry out a center-based study (at Newton-Wellesley
      Hospital). Physicians will ask patients meeting eligibility criteria to participate in this
      study and undergo an N-of-1 trial.

      Each N-of-1 trial will consist of three paired crossover periods (each 6-weeks long) during
      which the patient will receive either AM + placebo (placebo every morning and AM 25 mg at
      night) or combination treatment AM+FL (FL 20 mg in the morning and AM 25 mg at night). The
      dispensing pharmacy will carry out paired randomization.

      We will assess patient evaluations and outcome measures at baseline prior to trial, at the
      end of each treatment period, and 3 months after completion of the N-of-1 trial. In
      addition, at baseline, we will obtain demographic information, an electrocardiogram, and
      baseline blood tests. We may ask patients to have additional blood tests at the period
      evaluations. We will also do a pregnancy test for all women of child-bearing age enrolling
      in the study. The main study outcome measure will be the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire
      (FIQ). Additional measures will include the Visual Analog Scales (VAS) for pain, sleep,
      global well-being; Physician VAS for global well-being; and tender-point score.

      We will analyze the results of the N-of-1 trials in two ways: (1) using only the individual
      patient's results (classic one-sided t-test) and (2) using the patient's results in
      combination with the results of other patients who underwent similar trials (the combined
      N-of-1 approach). To obtain the latter information, we will include each patient's results
      for the collective analysis. We will provide these results back to the physicians and will
      record the final treatment decisions the physicians reach with their patients. In addition,
      we will ask both physicians and patients to comment on their participation in an N-of-1
      trial and this research process. Followup of patients 3 months after completion of their
      N-of-1 trial will include determining current medication and a current outcome assessment.
      Investigators will record all adverse drug reactions and patients withdrawn from studies.
      They will also record the reason for withdrawal for all patients choosing to withdraw. We
      will include results from patients who drop out due to reasons other than drug reactions in
      the combined N-of-1 analyses if completed period pair results are available. An independent
      safety officer will review all withdrawals.

      Results of individual patient trials will be confidential; however, we will combine these
      results (after removal of patient identifiers) with the results of other patients, and will
      publish the overall results of this study. We will maintain the connection of results to
      patient identifiers only to enable us to provide results to individual investigators and
      their patients.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who meet fibromyalgia criteria as defined by the American College of
             Rheumatology

          -  No systemic illness (current or past) or other contraindications to taking study
             medications (e.g. known hypersensitivity)

          -  Age 18-60

          -  Patient willingness, and physician agreement, to discontinue CNS
             medications/NSAIDs/analgesics for 1 week prior to starting their trial

          -  Patient informed consent and agreement to participate in an N-of-1 trial

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients who are currently pregnant or who plan to become pregnant during the study
             period

          -  Patients with any contraindications to using either amitriptyline or fluoxetine
