TITLE:
      Study of High-flow Oxygen Therapy Against Standard Therapy in Bronchiolitis
SUMMARY:
      Bronchiolitis is a common illness of the respiratory tract caused by infection of the tiny
      airways within the lungs called bronchioles. At present the standard care of hospitalized
      children with bronchiolitis is oxygen via nasal prongs. In this study the investigators
      would like to compare standard ward management with a new method of delivering oxygen called
      high flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy (HFNOT). HFNOT involves breathing warmed, moistened
      oxygen through nasal cannulae at a flow rate of 8 liters/minute. Accumulated experience
      suggests that HFNOT eases the child's work of breathing and reduces need for ICU admission
      and invasive respiratory support.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      We propose a prospective open randomised controlled trial to compare high flow nasal cannula
      oxygen therapy (HFNOT) with standard oxygen therapy for infants hospitalised with
      bronchiolitis. This study will be the first of its kind, as currently there is no evidence
      in the published literature.

      All children will be cared for by the same medical team on two wards. All aspects of care
      other than oxygen delivery will not be specified, and be at the discretion of the
      physicians. HFNOT will not be used as an escalation of care on the wards.

      Randomisation will be performed by REDcap, in blocks of 6 patients. Patients will be
      identified in Emergency, informed consent obtained, and treatment started prior to transfer
      to the ward.

      For patients randomised to HFNOT, the flow rate will be fixed at 8 liters/minute, and the
      inspired oxygen concentration titrated to maintain saturations above 92%.

      Interim statistical analysis will be conducted to determine any positive or negative effect
      of HFNOT therapy. The first interval analysis will be performed after 50 subjects, the
      second after 100 subjects. If an effect is found, the study will be terminated following
      discussion with the hospital statistician and ethics board. Whichever treatment arm is found
      to be beneficial will be instituted as standard care for children with bronchiolitis.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  All children under 18 months of age with a clinical diagnosis of bronchiolitis
             requiring admission to hospital for observation and oxygen.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Infants admitted directly to ICU from Emergency.

          -  Prior positive pressure home ventilation.

          -  Tracheostomy.

          -  Nasogastric tubes in situ on admission.

          -  Upper airway abnormality.

          -  Congenital heart disease.
