TITLE:
      Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP) (Pilot Study)
SUMMARY:
      The SHEP Pilot Study had six objectives, each designed to develop and test critical
      components of a full scale trial directed at the health consequences of treating isolated
      systolic hypertension (ISH) in the elderly.

      l. To estimate and compare the yield of participants for randomization into a clinical trial
      from various community groups using various recruitment techniques.

      2. To estimate compliance with the visit schedule and to the prescribed double-blind
      regimens.

      3. To estimate and compare the effectiveness of specified antihypertensive medications in
      reducing the blood pressure.

      4. To estimate and compare the unwanted effects of specified antihypertensive medication in
      an elderly population.

      5. To evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of periodic behavioral assessment in this
      population.

      6. To develop and test methods of ascertaining stroke and other disease endpoints.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Isolated systolic hypertension, defined as systolic blood pressure of 140 mm Hg or greater
      with a diastolic blood pressure below 90 mm Hg, is known to be associated with an increase
      of risk of coronary heart disease and stroke. The HANES I group estimated that isolated
      systolic hypertension, uncommon under 54 years of age, occurred in 5 percent to 10 percent
      of adults over 55 years and was less common than systolic-diastolic elevation. Evidence was
      not readily available that there was effective and safe therapy to correct isolated systolic
      hypertension. At that time, there was no body of clinical or research data that conclusively
      proved that such therapy, if available, was beneficial.

      Several groups had expressed interest in a clinical trial on systolic hypertension in the
      elderly. Among these were the House Select Committee on Aging, a Blue-Ribbon Panel on
      Hypertension in the Elderly, Citizens for the Treatment of High Blood Pressure, panels and
      experts associated with the National High Blood Pressure Education Program, the National
      Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Mental Health, and the National Institute of
      Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke.

      A Policy and Data Monitoring Board was appointed to review the protocols for the pilot
      studies as they developed and make recommendations to the Director of NHLBI. The Policy and
      Data Monitoring Board reviewed the accumulated data on April 8, 1983 and recommended to the
      Institute that a full scale trial be implemented. The recommendation was accepted by the
      Director, NHLBI and was presented to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council at
      its meeting in May 1983. A full scale trial was conducted.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      A randomized, double-blind design, with two groups and fixed sample size. The 551
      participants were randomized in a stratified double-blind manner to either chlorthalidone or
      matching placebo in a ratio of 4:l. Subjects failing to reach goal blood pressure were
      randomized a second time to receive one of the following drugs in addition to
      chlorthalidone: reserpine, hydralazine, and metoprolol. Subjects on placebo in Step I who
      did not achieve goal had a corresponding Step II placebo added to their regimen.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, aged 60 or over. Isolated systolic hypertension. Normal diastolic pressure
        of less than 90 mm Hg.
