TITLE:
      Dietary Intervention Study for Hypertension (DISH)
SUMMARY:
      The primary objective of this multicenter cooperative clinical trial was to determine if
      dietary modification would enable drug controlled hypertensive patients to remain at 'goal
      blood pressures' after antihypertensive medication was withdrawn. The proposal made use of
      the HDFP hypertensive population who had five years of treatment for their hypertension.
      Additionally, the group of investigators proposed to determine if dietary treatment would
      permit patients not previously adequately controlled under the HDFP program to achieve
      normalization of blood pressure with a combination of dietary modification and drug
      treatment. The study also proposed to search for predictors (i.e., levels of hormonal agents
      such as plasma renin activity) of responsiveness to dietary manipulation among the
      hypertensive population as well as to identify psychological attributes that might be of
      importance in managing these patients.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The background against which the proposal was made had been developed from the combined
      information of the Veterans Administration Cooperative Study and the Hypertension Detection
      and Follow-up Study. Data from both these studies clearly established the importance of
      reducing sodium content by means of diuretic administration as a mainstay of the treatment
      of elevated blood pressure. The risks of the lifetime of treatment were undefined, but the
      cost of indefinite treatment of high blood pressure was sufficiently high to stimulate
      careful examination of alternative modes of management of such patients. The demonstrations
      by Parijs and others that moderate reduction in sodium intake led to improved management of
      hypertension and data suggesting that increased potassium intake may enhance this blood
      pressure lowering effect associated with sodium restriction was cited by the investigators
      as a basis for the trial. Any additional data regarding modest sodium restriction and
      potassium ingestion would have impact on utilizing such therapy in preventing hypertension
      and as adjunctive therapy.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      The study was intended to take advantage of the availability of patients at the three
      centers at the completion of the Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Study. These
      patients were enrolled as 'stepped-care' participants and had been treated with
      antihypertensive drugs for at least five years. The main objective of the study was to
      determine the contribution of dietary modification to maintenance of normal blood pressure
      after withdrawal of medication. Two types of diet change were followed: 1) reduction of
      sodium intake coupled with increased potassium intake; and 2) reduction of weight in the
      subgroups of patients that were obese.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women with hypertension. Diastolic blood pressure equal to or above 95 mm Hg and
        90 mm Hg, respectively for home and clinic readings.
