TITLE:
      DElirium prediCtIon in the intenSIve Care Unit: Head to Head comparisON of Two Delirium Prediction Models
SUMMARY:
      Currently, two ICU delirium prediction models are available: the PRE-DELIRIC model and the
      early prediction model (E-PRE-DELRIC). However, the use of these prediction models is not
      yet implemented as standard in clinical practice, as it is unknown which delirium prediction
      model can best be used to predict delirium in ICU patients.Therefore the main aim of this
      study is to compare the performance of the PRE-DELIRIC model and the E-PRE-DELRIC model.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Delirium often occurs in ICU patients and is associated with negative consequences,
      requiring prevention. A prediction model facilitates the identification of those patients at
      risk for delirium and therefore need prevention the most. At present, two ICU delirium
      prediction models are available. First the PRE-DELIRIC model was developed. This recently
      recalibrated model reliably predicts ICU patients' risk for delirium within 24 hours after
      ICU admission. Because a relevant number of patients develops delirium during the first 24
      hours after ICU admission, and prevention ideally should be deployed as soon as possible,
      the investigators developed the 'early prediction model' (E-PRE-DELIRIC) which reliably
      predicts delirium immediately after ICU admission. To implement a delirium prediction model
      in clinical practice, one needs to know which model best can be used. Currently, the use of
      a delirium prediction model is not implemented as standard in clinical practice, as this
      information is unavailable. Therefore the main aim of this study is to compare the
      (predictive and clinical) performance of the PRE-DELIRIC model and the E-PRE-DELRIC model.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  ICU patients aged ≥18 years;

          -  Surgical, medical, neurology/neurosurgical, or trauma patients.

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Delirious at ICU admission;

          -  Expected ICU stay shorter than 6 hours;

          -  Unable to reliably assess ICU delirium due to:

          -  sustained coma during entire ICU stay;

          -  unable to understand the language spoken;

          -  severely mentally disabled;

          -  serious receptive aphasia;

          -  serious auditory or visual disorders.
