TITLE:
      Motion Analysis of Delirium in the ICU
SUMMARY:
      Delirium, as a common complication of hospitalization, poses significant health problems in
      hospitalized patients. Though about a third of delirium cases can benefit from intervention,
      detecting and predicting delirium is still very limited in practice. A common
      characterization of delirium is changes in activity level, causing patients to become
      hyperactive or hypoactive which is manifested in facial expressions and total body
      movements. This pilot study is designed to test the feasibility of a delirium detection
      system using movement data obtained from 3-axis wearable accelerometers and Microsoft Kinect
      sensor, in conjunction with electronics medical record (EMR) data to analyze the relation of
      whole-body movement as well as facial expressions with delirium.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The aim of the study is to assess the potential of motion and facial expression data for
      detecting delirium in ICU patients by comparing motion and facial expression patterns in
      delirium and control group. In this study, the investigators will use ActivePalTM
      accelerometer to record each subject's movement patterns. Also, a processed video using the
      KINECT application-programming interface to identify patient facial expressions and movement
      patterns. A total of 40 participants will be enrolled with delirium and 20 patients without
      delirium will be used as control group. Motion profiles will be compared in the motorically
      defined subgroups (hyperactive, hypoactive, normal) based on accelerometer and Kinect data.
      Then differences in facial expression, number of changes in postures and percentage of time
      spent moving between motorically defined subgroups and in delirium and control group. EMR
      data will also be used to assess the feasibility of detecting delirium by additionally
      including information on related risk factors.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  Intensive care unit patient

          -  18 years of age or older

          -  Eligibility confirmed within 24 hours of admission

          -  Positive Confusion Assessment Method score

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Anticipated intensive care unit stay less than one day

          -  Less than 18 years of age

          -  Inability to wear a motion sensor watch (ActivPal)
