TITLE:
      Oral Calcium in Pregnant Women With Hypertension
SUMMARY:
      To determine of providing calcium supplementation to women with pre-existing hypertension
      reduces the level of blood pressure, requirement for antihypertensive drugs, and incidence
      of pre-eclampsia.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Maternal and fetal complications are more likely to occur in pregnant women with preexisting
      hypertension. Alterations in calcium metabolism, the renin angiotensin system, and
      intracellular free calcium concentration have been identified in this high risk population.
      The beneficial effects of calcium supplementation on blood pressure and the incidence of
      superimposed pre-eclampsia may be due to correction of the hormonal and cellular basis for
      vasoconstriction. The trial sought to prove that oral calcium lowered parathyroid hormone,
      reduced intracellular free calcium, and decreased vascular endothelin production, resulting
      in vasodilation and compensatory stimulation of the renin-angiotensin system.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized. Double blind. In this observational study, subjects were assigned to two grams
      of supplemental elemental calcium or to placebo at 13 to 15 weeks gestation. The trial
      determined the effect of oral calcium supplementation on: the level of blood pressure; the
      need for antihypertensive drugs; forearm and peripheral vascular resistance; the incidence
      of maternal complications, including pre-eclampsia and eclampsia; and plasma levels of
      vitamin D3, ionized calcium, parathyroid, renin activity, angiotensin II, endothelin,
      nitrate/nitrite, prostacyclins, and intracellular calcium concentrations in lymphocytes and
      platelets. These variables were measured prior to randomization and every two months
      throughout pregnancy and the postpartum. Support ended in July 1999.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Pregnant women with chronic hypertension.
