TITLE:
      Clinical Study of Intermittent Positive Pressure Breathing (IPPB)
SUMMARY:
      To evaluate the efficacy of long-term intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB)
      treatment when used as an adjunct to the overall care of ambulatory outpatients with chronic
      obstructive pulmonary disease. The evaluation compared the use of IPPB with use of a powered
      nebulizer.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      Intermittent positive pressure breathing may be a useful adjunct therapy for patients with
      chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It is, however, quite expensive; moreover, in 1976
      its treatment efficacy had not been determined. Although the effectiveness of IPPB had been
      previously studied, the influence of long-term treatment was not known for the following
      reasons: The individuals studied had been too few and were not randomly assigned to
      treatment groups, the patient groups were not homogeneous and their clinical and functional
      status were not well-documented, and precise descriptions of the manner in which IPPB was
      administered were not recorded.

      Based on these facts, a conference on the Scientific Basis of Respiratory Therapy,
      co-sponsored by the American Thoracic Society and the Division of Lung Diseases, issued a
      recommendation to develop a controlled clinical study of IPPB. Contracts were awarded to
      five clinical centers and a data center in November 1976. Planning of the trial ended in
      November 1977. Recruitment began in April 1978 for the 985 individuals who took part in this
      trial and ended in October 1980. Patients enrolled after March 31, 1980, were followed for
      30 months instead of 36 months. Follow-up was completed in May 1983.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized, fixed sample of 985 patients. Eligible patients were assigned to a treatment
      group using intermittent positive pressure breathing or to a control group using a powered
      nebulizer for treatment 3-4 times a day. Treatments continued for 3 years. Endpoints related
      to quality of life and respiratory function and capability.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, ages 30 to 74, who were ambulatory and had symptomatic chronic bronchitis
        or emphysema.
