TITLE:
      A Phase I Trial of Peptide T: Efficacy for the Neuropsychiatric Complications of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
SUMMARY:
      To study the safety, toxicology, and activity of Peptide T (D-Ala-1-peptide-T-amide) in
      humans and to find out more about the ability of peptide T to prevent, halt, and/or reverse
      AIDS-associated immunologic disturbances.

      Recent information suggests that the central nervous system (CNS) is often impaired in
      HIV-infected individuals. The dysfunction of the CNS may be either a direct or an indirect
      result of HIV infection. One method to prevent HIV infection is to block entry of the virus
      into the cells of the body. Peptide T shows laboratory evidence of blocking the entrance of
      HIV into cells that are susceptible to HIV infection. Studies that have been done indicate
      that peptide T is nontoxic in the doses that are used in this study.

      AIDS patients with minimal (group 1) or moderate (group 2) cognitive dysfunction (mental
      impairment) receive an increasing schedule of three dosage levels of peptide T. All patients
      receive an intravenous (IV) dose of peptide T for 10 days followed by the intermediate dose
      and then the highest dose, each intravenously for 10 days. Following successful completion
      of 3 IV doses, four patients participate in an intranasal pharmacokinetic (blood level
      study) dosage trial of 3 doses (different from IV) of peptide T once for each of 3
      successive days. Follow-up continues for up to 1 year.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  History of either opportunistic infection and/or Kaposi's sarcoma, and/or serologic
             evidence of past infection with HIV. Ability to give informed consent.

          -  Allowed but discouraged: Antiretroviral medication. Immunomodulating medication.
             Psychoactive medication.

          -  Not breast-feeding

          -  Abstinence or agree to use barrier methods of birth control / contraception during
             the study

          -  Not pregnant

          -  Negative pregnancy test

          -  CD4 >= 200 cells/mm3 (200 - 300 - 400 - 500 - 600 - 700 - 800 plus).

          -  Creatinine <= 1.6 mg/dl

          -  Hemoglobin >= 12 g/dl

          -  Platelet Count >= 100000 /mm3

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Patients with the following diseases or symptoms are excluded: Space-occupying lesion
             in brain. Life-threatening opportunistic infection at time of entry into trial.
             History of major psychiatric illness prior to 1977 or time of initial exposure to
             HIV, if that is known.

          -  Patients with the following diseases or symptoms are excluded: Space-occupying lesion
             in brain. Life-threatening opportunistic infection at time of entry into trial.
             History of major psychiatric illness prior to 1977 or time of initial exposure to
             HIV, if that is known.

          -  Excluded within 4 weeks of study entry:

        Antiretroviral agents. Anticancer treatments. Psychoactive agents.

        Excluded within 4 months of study entry:

        Suramin.

          -  Avoid: Antiretroviral medication. Immunomodulating medication. Psychoactive
             medication.

          -  Excluded within 4 weeks of study entry:

        Radiation.

          -  Breast-feeding

          -  Positive pregnancy test

          -  Pregnant

          -  No abstinence or no agreement to use barrier methods of birth control / contraception
             during the study
