TITLE:
      Osteoporosis Prevention in Preadolescent Girls
SUMMARY:
      This study will test an osteoporosis prevention program aimed at preadolescent girls between
      the ages of 10 and 12 who have not yet started their menstrual periods. Girls in this age
      group are adding large amounts of new bone to their skeletons. Adding more bone at this time
      of life can reduce a person's chances of developing osteoporosis (thinning bones) in later
      years.

      We will look at how this osteoporosis prevention program affects the amount of calcium in
      the girls' diets, the amount of weight-bearing exercise they do, and their bone mass
      measured using ultrasound testing of the heel.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      The study's objective is to demonstrate the efficacy of a behavioral/educational
      intervention in increasing levels of dietary calcium intake and weight-bearing exercise
      within an at-risk population in a stage of rapid accrual of bone mass-specifically,
      premenarchal girls between the ages of 10 and 12. We will use cluster randomization to
      randomize girls to either the intervention or a program of education only. We will randomize
      eighteen groups of girls into each arm of the study.

      The intervention consists of six interactive sessions using various media (i.e., overhead
      transparencies, graphics, and three-dimensional demonstrations) to present instructional
      material. Topics include an explanation of osteoporosis and its modifiable and nonmodifiable
      risk factors, prevention of osteoporosis via healthy food choices (i.e., high calcium, low
      fat foods), and prevention of osteoporosis via weight-bearing exercise. Each girl monitors
      her own progress toward the goal of 1350 to 1500 milligrams of calcium per day. A similar
      method allows simple self-monitoring of weight-bearing activity. The intervention program is
      reinforced via monthly self-monitoring for 18 months. The education-only program consists of
      six generic sessions on healthy eating, physical fitness, and healthy lifestyle choices.

      The primary outcomes of interest are higher calcium intake and higher levels of
      weight-bearing exercise. A secondary outcome of interest is increased broadband ultrasound
      attenuation of the os calcis, assessed using quantitative ultrasound. In summary, the group
      of girls targeted is ideal for this intervention because they are at a stage of rapid
      accrual of bone mass.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  9- and 10-year-old premenarchal girls (girls who have not started their periods).

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Comorbid conditions or medications that are associated with decreased bone density
             such as the following: corticosteroids; anticonvulsants; thiazide diuretics; history
             of cancer; Type I diabetes; thyrotoxicosis; hyperparathyroidism; Cushing's syndrome;
             juvenile rheumatoid arthritis; connective tissue disease or hemolytic anemia; asthma
             which may limit ability to participate in the exercise intervention; known history of
             dietary disorder, including anorexia, bulimia or lactose intolerance; postmenarchal.
