TITLE:
      Multicenter Investigation of Limitation of Infarct Size (MILIS)
SUMMARY:
      To assess the ability of two separate therapeutic interventions, propranolol and
      hyaluronidase, to limit the ultimate size of an acute myocardial infarction. A secondary
      objective was to assess the influence of these therapies upon ventricular function and
      morbidity following myocardial infarction.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      BACKGROUND:

      The study of methods for minimizing the mass of ischemic infarcted myocardium associated
      with a myocardial infarction was identified as a topic of research priority in the 1973
      Report of the Panel Chairman for the Preparation of the National Heart, Blood Vessel, Lung,
      and Blood Program. In September 1976, the Institute convened a workshop involving 32
      investigators active in this field, respondents to past solicitations, experts on the topic
      of collaborative clinical trials, members of previous review committees, and several members
      of the Cardiology Advisory Committee. The attendees were enthusiastic about the practicality
      and timeliness of a collaborative clinical trial in this field. The concept of collaborative
      clinical trials to protect ischemic myocardium was discussed by the Cardiology Advisory
      Committee in its meeting of September 22, 1976, and was recommended affirmatively and
      enthusiastically. This trial was part of the Institute's initiatives and was reviewed and
      favorably recommended by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council at its
      December 1976 meeting. The trial consisted of five clinical centers, six central
      laboratories, a clinical coordinating center, and a data coordinating center.

      DESIGN NARRATIVE:

      Randomized. Group A patients were randomized to propranolol therapy, hyaluronidase therapy,
      or control therapy; patients assigned to Group B (propranolol contraindicated) were assigned
      to hyaluronidase or control therapy. Single-blind for propranolol therapy, double-blind for
      hyaluronidase or control therapy; fixed sample. Detailed follow-up of clinical status and
      endpoints for a six-month period; annual health status follow-up thereafter.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Men and women, under age 75. Documented myocardial infarction which could be treated
        within 18 hours of onset of ischemic symptoms.
