TITLE:
      Diet and Prevention of Ischemic Heart Disease: a Translational Approach
SUMMARY:
      The objective of this study is to test the effect of substitution dietary guidelines that
      are specifically aimed at the prevention of ischemic heart disease (IHD) on the dietary
      intake in the general Danish population.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      225 participants will be included in the intervention. The intervention is planned to run
      for six months in a real life setting.

      The study is a randomized, parallel dietary intervention study. Dietary intake, selected IHD
      biomarkers and anthropometric measurements will be measured at two visits during the
      intervention period as well as 6 months after the end of the intervention. The study
      includes a baseline visit followed by a visit where web based dietary records will be
      completed by the subjects and blood samples and anthropometrics will be measured.

      The intervention will consist of information on dietary advice due to the specific IHD
      dietary guideline or the current national dietary guidelines. The information will be
      provided to the participants via leaflets and recipes.

      After the baseline visit the subjects will be randomized to group A, B or C: In group A the
      subjects will receive dietary advice, according to the specific IHD dietary guideline, in
      group B the subjects will receive dietary advice according to the current national dietary
      guidelines and in group C the subjects will be instructed to follow their normal dietary
      habits.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  healthy men and women aged 30 to 65 years who has one or more self-assessed ischemic
             heart disease risk factors at screening: physical inactivity, overweight or obese
             (BMI ≥ 25/m2 ), waist circumference (≥ 80 cm for women, ≥ 94 cm for men). In
             addition, the participants should have the motivation and willingness to be
             randomized to any of the three groups, and to do their best to follow the given
             protocol .

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  no internet access or no access to a computer, smoking, pregnancy, or breast-feeding
             or planning to become pregnant within the next 12 months, a history of cardiovascular
             disease, type 2 diabetes, chronic disease / disorders that may affect the results of
             the study, substance abuse within the past 12 months, regular alcohol consumption >
             21 units / week for men or > 14 units/ week for women, allergy or intolerance to food
             groups in the dietary guidelines, supplements with mega doses of nutrients that can
             have potential impact on ischemic heart disease risk markers (eg . fish oils).
