TITLE:
      Robot Aided Rehabilitation - Intervention
SUMMARY:
      The purpose of this study is to address the allocation of therapy resources between the arm
      and the hand as well as to examine the benefits of combining passive stretching with active
      movement training.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION:
      Aim 1 and Hypothesis 1 are included in a separate submission and will not be included in
      this protocol and consent

      Aim 2. To compare the efficacy of training the arm versus the hand in promoting upper
      extremity rehabilitation.

      Hypothesis 2: Combining treatment of the arm and hand, even at the cost of decreasing the
      total amount of time which can be spent on either, will lead to greater improvement than
      focusing primarily on the arm or on the hand alone.

      Aim 3. To examine the efficacy of combining passive stretching with active-assistive
      (resistive training for the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand.

      Hypothesis 3: Multi-joint intelligent stretching followed by active (assistive or resistive)
      movement facilitated by use of the IntelliArm and X-Glove will improve motor control of the
      upper extremity more than standard movement therapy alone.

      BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE

      Stoke is the leading cause of adult disability and the third leading cause of death (killing
      160,000 Americans/year) in the United States; about 750,000 first ever and recurrent strokes
      occur in the United States each year. The economic burden is huge with estimated costs for
      medical expenses and lost wages totaling $62.7 billion in the U.S. Stroke is commonly
      associated with motor-related disabilities, typically affecting the shoulder, elbow, wrist,
      and fingers of the arm simultaneously. Patients may develop spastic hypertonia and reduced
      range of motion (ROM) at multiple joints. Several stereotypical patterns of arm impairment
      with multiple joints involved are commonly seen in stroke survivors, including
      adducted/internally rotated shoulder, flexed elbow, pronated forearm, flexed wrist, and
      clenched fist. Furthermore, impaired arms of stroke survivors commonly develop abnormal
      coupling among the multiple joints and among the multiple DOFs (e.g. shoulder abduction,
      flexion, and rotation) at a given joint. Stroke survivors may exhibit a limited capacity to
      create independent movements of individual joints or to coordinate the activity of multiple
      joints. There is a strong need to treat this hypertonia, involuntary coactivation, and poor
      coordination on a frequent basis to reduce spasticity/contracture and increase mobility in
      those who have had a stroke. This is the goal of the proposed study.

      METHODS Aims 2 and 3 will be addressed through a longitudinal intervention trial. Outcomes
      data for each subject will be collected at multiple time points during the study.
      Specifically, evaluation sessions will be conducted two times within the two weeks prior to
      initiation of therapy (Pre 1 and Pre 2) two times within the two weeks after the conclusion
      of therapy (Post 1 and Post 2), and two months later (Follow-up).

      Selection of Subjects 72 subacute stroke survivors will be recruited according to the
      inclusion and exclusion criteria listed over 5 years.

      Intervention Each subject will complete 22 therapy sessions over 6 weeks, in addition to 5
      evaluation sessions and 1 screening session. Subjects will be assigned evenly to one of six
      groups. Groups are split into 2 conditions based on stretching and 3 conditions based on
      target of intervention (arm, hand, or both arm and hand). Half of the 72 subjects will be
      assigned to the stretching groups and the other half to the no-stretching groups. One third
      of the subjects will be assigned to each of the arm-alone, hand-alone, and arm-and-hand
      conditions. Arm-alone groups will use the IntelliArm, hand-alone groups will use the
      X-Glove, and arm-and-hand groups will use both the IntelliArm and the X-Glove by alternating
      sessions with each robot (11 sessions with the IntelliArm, 11 sessions with the X-Glove).
      For those assigned to the stretching groups, subjects will complete 30 minutes of passive
      stretching with the IntelliArm or X-Glove. For those assigned to the no-stretching
      condition, subjects will don the robot according to their group assignment and wear it for
      30 minutes preceding the active therapy session. For each group, the initial 30 minutes of
      stretching or relaxing will be followed by 45-60 minutes of active therapy with the
      IntelliArm or X-Glove (depending on group assignment), for a total session time of 75-90
      minutes.

      The subjects participating in Aims 2 and 3 will be asked to come to our labs at the
      Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago to provide informed consent and then complete a
      screening, which will take approximately 30 minutes and include a basic questionnaire and
      some clinical evaluations. If qualified and enrolled, subjects will complete 5 evaluation
      sessions and 22 training sessions.

      Training

      The training in this study will last for 6 weeks with about 4 visits per week for 22
      sessions in total. At the beginning of each training session, the subject will be asked
      about any muscle or joint soreness in the hemiparetic arm and hand since the last session.
      If the subject has persistent or severe pain, he/she will not continue until he/she feels
      sufficiently recovered and the clinician agrees.

      IntelliArm Training During the training, the subject will sit upright on a barber's chair
      with his/her trunk strapped to the backrest of the chair. The subject's arm, forearm and
      hand will be strapped to braces that are connected to a robotic arm; adjustments will be
      made to customize the robotic arm for each subject. Once adjustments are completed, the
      training will begin, consisting of passive stretching (for half of the subjects) followed by
      active movement therapy. . Each training session should last between one and one and a half
      hours.

      In the stretching mode, the robotic arm will move the subject's shoulder, elbow and wrist.
      Sometimes these joints will be moved one at a time and sometimes they will be moved
      together. The joints/DOFs with excessive coupling and/or increased stiffness and the
      associated arm postures will be identified and will be targeted for particular attention..
      The IntelliArm will stretch the impaired arm under novel multi-joint intelligent control to
      stretch the joints forcefully and safely in well-coordinated patterns. On the one hand, for
      safe treatment, the stretching velocities will decrease with increased resistance torques at
      the multiple joints involved and each joint will be stretched according to its own condition
      and the condition of the coupled joints. On the other hand, for effective treatment, the
      stretching will not stop until pre-specified peak resistance torque is reached at the
      joints/DOFs involved. The stretched arm will be held at the extreme positions for a period
      of time to let stress relaxation occur before the joints are moved to other extreme
      positions.

      In the active training mode, the subject will be asked to move the robotic arm around to
      interact with virtual targets and objects. For example, target points will be displayed and
      the subject will be asked to move the hand from the current position to the target, while
      matching the individual joints angles as well. A circle in the virtual hand needs to overlap
      the red-dot targets on the computer monitor for successful match. The IntelliArm can be made
      backdrivable by implementing zero-torque control with six-DOF force/torque sensors at each
      joint. Alternatively, assistance (or resistance) can be provided by the IntelliArm to the
      impaired arm during the voluntary movement in training to help subjects with arm impairments
      reach the target. The level of assistance will be adjusted depending on the severity of the
      impairment. Subjects will also move the IntelliArm in order to play computer games such as
      catching a baseball or football, and to transport virtual objects from one location to
      another in the display. As the user progresses in motor control capability, the workspace
      will be increased and resistance instead of assistance may be provided during the movement
      to make it more challenging to the patients.

      X-Glove Training Two-thirds of the subjects will utilize the X-Glove in their therapy. This
      actuated glove provides independent extension force to each digit. Cables run from linear
      actuators located on the forearm through cable guides located on the back side of the digits
      to the fingertips (Fig. 3). A wrist splint keeps the wrist in the neutral position such that
      movement of the cable translates into corresponding movement of the digit. Force in each
      cable is measured with an in-line sensor, while cable position can be estimated from the
      motor displacement. As with the IntelliArm, the X-Glove will be operated in two modes, one
      of which will provide stretching while the other provides assistance for hand opening during
      active training. For subjects assigned to stretching groups, the X-Glove will first run in a
      mode that provides cyclic stretching at a rate of approximately 90 repetitions of passive
      range of motion over 30 minutes. The motors will move the digits from an initial flexed
      resting posture to the subject's extension limit, as determined by force sensors and range
      of motion limits set by the therapist daily. The subject will remain relaxed throughout the
      stretching period.

      Evaluation and Measurement In an initial screening session, a clinician will check the
      subject's health status and conduct clinical examinations in order to determine if the
      subject fits the inclusion and exclusion criteria. During the screening session the subject
      will participate in several clinical assessments. The screening evaluations will take about
      one half hour.

      For each evaluation session he/she will be asked to come to our laboratories on the 13th
      floor of the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago. Evaluation of subjects will have
      neuromechanical and clinical components; both the neuromechanical and clinical components of
      evaluation will take approximately two hours each and occur two times, once per week for the
      two weeks prior to treatment, two times, once per week for the two weeks following treatment
      and at the 2 month follow-up. .

      Protection Against Risk:

      A number of safeguards have been implemented. Mechanical/electrical stops will be used to
      restrict the motion of the robots to safe ranges. Velocity limits will also be set to
      restrict the speed of the movement. Joint angle, velocity, and force will be monitored
      continuously to ensure they fall within the appropriate range. Exceeding the thresholds will
      result in motor shut-down. Additionally, the motors can be turned off at any time using an
      accessible on/off switch to protect from discomfort or potential injuries. The IntelliArm
      and X-Glove have previously been used safely with a number of stroke survivors. Rest breaks
      will be provided as needed during therapy to prevent excessive muscle soreness and fatigue.

      A cast saw will be used to remove the fiberglass cast used in evaluations. Improper use of
      the saw could produce a burn. Project staff has been trained in the operation of the saw and
      proper procedures to follow. Adhesive used to secure the surface electrode could irritate
      the skin. The skin will be carefully prepared before applying the electrode and then cleaned
      when the electrode is removed.

      Specific to TMS, although rare instances of seizure have been reported when long trains of
      high frequency excitatory TMS were applied, these events have not been reported when
      recommended guidelines originally published in 1996 and updated by Rossi et al. 2009 Clin.
      Neurophysiol. 120:2008-2039, have been followed. The parameters proposed in this study are
      well within these published safety guidelines, and individuals who have suffered a stroke
      are one of the most commonly requited populations for TMS studies. Providing they have never
      had a seizure and do not meet any of the other exclusion criteria listed above, they are a
      clinical population to which TMS can be safely applied.

      Data Analysis:

      To relate and find the relationship between physiological data and functional performance
      the data will be evaluated using a) biomechanics data analysis, b) correlation and principle
      component analysis, c) regression, d) Rasch analysis, and e) structural equation modeling.
      Physiological data obtained from the IntelliArm (e.g. abnormal coupling of between the
      joints/DOFs, passive workspace and active workspace, multiple joint DOF/stiffness) will be
      analyzed to describe and characterize the arm impairment. The physiological data will also
      be compared to the therapist-rated data (WMFT, ARAT, CAHAI, FMUE) to investigate their
      relationship. To determine the proper physiological measurements in rehabilitation of stroke
      and relate them to functional performances, correlation analysis and principal component
      analysis will be conducted as initial steps to find which physiological variables have high
      correlations with functional measures and cluster together as similar indicators. Those
      potential indicators will be filters for a data reduction procedure. The selected data will
      then be used in a multiple regression analysis to predict functional outcomes at the
      activity level (assessed by WMFT, ARAT, and CAHAI) and participation level (assessed by the
      datalogger) with adjusted person information and environmental factors serving as
      categorical variables. Rasch analysis will be used to evaluate the item difficulty hierarchy
      and item fit to link subject's functional ability level with specific functional tasks,
      which allows us to find the clinical potential thresholds/cut-off points if there is a
      consistent pattern between exists the physiological data and functional measures.
      Furthermore, an ICF model will be evaluated using structural equation modeling, which can
      test a set of regression equations simultaneously and exam the relationship among the
      impairment ability, participation variables with the personal and environmental factors
      taken into consideration. Two months after the 22 sessions training, the subject will be
      asked to return to our lab for a follow-up evaluation. The same evaluations as described
      above will be done in this session. The subjects, who participated in the training, will
      fill out a form, which may be sent to them by email, about his/her health status and injury
      history three month after the training period to evaluated changes in performance in the
      hemiparetic arm.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
      Inclusion Criteria:

          -  First focal unilateral lesion, ischemic or hemorrhagic

          -  Had a stroke less than a month prior to enrollment

          -  Rated between stages 1-4 on the Chedoke McMaster Stroke Assessment Impairment
             Inventory: Stage of Recovery of the Arm

          -  Rated between stages 1-4 on the Chedoke McMaster Stroke Assessment Impairment
             Inventory: Stage of Recovery of the Hand

        Exclusion Criteria:

          -  Apraxia

          -  Subjects who have other unrelated or musculoskeletal injuries
